{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2820
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
[SCENE.\'97A room furnished comfortably and tastefully, but not extravagantly. At the back, a door to the right leads to the entrance-hall, another to the left leads to Helmer\'92s study. Between the doors stands a piano. In the middle of the left-hand wall is a door, and beyond it a window. Near the window are a round table, arm-chairs and a small sofa. In the right-hand wall, at the farther end, another door; and on the same side, nearer the footlights, a stove, two easy chairs and a rocking-chair; between the stove and the door, a small table. Engravings on the walls; a cabinet with china and other small objects; a small book-case with well-bound books. The floors are carpeted, and a fire burns in the stove. It is winter.
\f1\i0 \

\f0\i A bell rings in the hall; shortly afterwards the door is heard to open. Enter NORA, humming a tune and in high spirits. She is in outdoor dress and carries a number of parcels; these she lays on the table to the right. She leaves the outer door open after her, and through it is seen a PORTER who is carrying a Christmas Tree and a basket, which he gives to the MAID who has opened the door.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NORA.\uc0\u8232 Hide the Christmas Tree carefully, Helen. Be sure the children do not see it until this evening, when it is dressed. 
\f0\i [To the PORTER, taking out her purse.]
\f1\i0  How much?\
PORTER.\uc0\u8232 Sixpence.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 There is a shilling. No, keep the change. 
\f0\i [The PORTER thanks her, and goes out. NORA shuts the door. She is laughing to herself, as she takes off her hat and coat. She takes a packet of macaroons from her pocket and eats one or two; then goes cautiously to her husband\'92s door and listens.]
\f1\i0  Yes, he is in. 
\f0\i [Still humming, she goes to the table on the right.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [calls out from his room]
\f1\i0 . Is that my little lark twittering out there?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [busy opening some of the parcels]
\f1\i0 . Yes, it is!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Is it my little squirrel bustling about?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 When did my squirrel come home?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Just now. 
\f0\i [Puts the bag of macaroons into her pocket and wipes her mouth.]
\f1\i0  Come in here, Torvald, and see what I have bought.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t disturb me. 
\f0\i [A little later, he opens the door and looks into the room, pen in hand.]
\f1\i0  Bought, did you say? All these things? Has my little spendthrift been wasting money again?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes but, Torvald, this year we really can let ourselves go a little. This is the first Christmas that we have not needed to economise.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Still, you know, we can\'92t spend money recklessly.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, Torvald, we may be a wee bit more reckless now, mayn\'92t we? Just a tiny wee bit! You are going to have a big salary and earn lots and lots of money.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, after the New Year; but then it will be a whole quarter before the salary is due.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Pooh! we can borrow until then.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora! 
\f0\i [Goes up to her and takes her playfully by the ear.]
\f1\i0  The same little featherhead! Suppose, now, that I borrowed fifty pounds today, and you spent it all in the Christmas week, and then on New Year\'92s Eve a slate fell on my head and killed me, and\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting her hands over his mouth]
\f1\i0 . Oh! don\'92t say such horrid things.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Still, suppose that happened,\'97what then?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 If that were to happen, I don\'92t suppose I should care whether I owed money or not.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but what about the people who had lent it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 They? Who would bother about them? I should not know who they were.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That is like a woman! But seriously, Nora, you know what I think about that. No debt, no borrowing. There can be no freedom or beauty about a home life that depends on borrowing and debt. We two have kept bravely on the straight road so far, and we will go on the same way for the short time longer that there need be any struggle.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [moving towards the stove]
\f1\i0 . As you please, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [following her]
\f1\i0 . Come, come, my little skylark must not droop her wings. What is this! Is my little squirrel out of temper? 
\f0\i [Taking out his purse.]
\f1\i0  Nora, what do you think I have got here?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [turning round quickly]
\f1\i0 . Money!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 There you are. 
\f0\i [Gives her some money.]
\f1\i0  Do you think I don\'92t know what a lot is wanted for housekeeping at Christmas-time?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [counting]
\f1\i0 . Ten shillings\'97a pound\'97two pounds! Thank you, thank you, Torvald; that will keep me going for a long time.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Indeed it must.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, yes, it will. But come here and let me show you what I have bought. And all so cheap! Look, here is a new suit for Ivar, and a sword; and a horse and a trumpet for Bob; and a doll and dolly\'92s bedstead for Emmy,\'97they are very plain, but anyway she will soon break them in pieces. And here are dress-lengths and handkerchiefs for the maids; old Anne ought really to have something better.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And what is in this parcel?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [crying out]
\f1\i0 . No, no! you mustn\'92t see that until this evening.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Very well. But now tell me, you extravagant little person, what would you like for yourself?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 For myself? Oh, I am sure I don\'92t want anything.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but you must. Tell me something reasonable that you would particularly like to have.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I really can\'92t think of anything\'97unless, Torvald\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [playing with his coat buttons, and without raising her eyes to his]
\f1\i0 . If you really want to give me something, you might\'97you might\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well, out with it!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [speaking quickly]
\f1\i0 . You might give me money, Torvald. Only just as much as you can afford; and then one of these days I will buy something with it.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But, Nora\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, do! dear Torvald; please, please do! Then I will wrap it up in beautiful gilt paper and hang it on the Christmas Tree. Wouldn\'92t that be fun?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What are little people called that are always wasting money?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Spendthrifts\'97I know. Let us do as you suggest, Torvald, and then I shall have time to think what I am most in want of. That is a very sensible plan, isn\'92t it?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling]
\f1\i0 . Indeed it is\'97that is to say, if you were really to save out of the money I give you, and then really buy something for yourself. But if you spend it all on the housekeeping and any number of unnecessary things, then I merely have to pay up again.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh but, Torvald\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You can\'92t deny it, my dear little Nora. 
\f0\i [Puts his arm round her waist.]
\f1\i0  It\'92s a sweet little spendthrift, but she uses up a deal of money. One would hardly believe how expensive such little persons are!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It\'92s a shame to say that. I do really save all I can.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [laughing]
\f1\i0 . That\'92s very true,\'97all you can. But you can\'92t save anything!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling quietly and happily]
\f1\i0 . You haven\'92t any idea how many expenses we skylarks and squirrels have, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You are an odd little soul. Very like your father. You always find some new way of wheedling money out of me, and, as soon as you have got it, it seems to melt in your hands. You never know where it has gone. Still, one must take you as you are. It is in the blood; for indeed it is true that you can inherit these things, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Ah, I wish I had inherited many of papa\'92s qualities.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And I would not wish you to be anything but just what you are, my sweet little skylark. But, do you know, it strikes me that you are looking rather\'97what shall I say\'97rather uneasy today?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Do I?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You do, really. Look straight at me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looks at him]
\f1\i0 . Well?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [wagging his finger at her]
\f1\i0 . Hasn\'92t Miss Sweet Tooth been breaking rules in town today?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No; what makes you think that?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Hasn\'92t she paid a visit to the confectioner\'92s?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I assure you, Torvald\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Not been nibbling sweets?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, certainly not.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Not even taken a bite at a macaroon or two?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, Torvald, I assure you really\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 There, there, of course I was only joking.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going to the table on the right]
\f1\i0 . I should not think of going against your wishes.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No, I am sure of that; besides, you gave me your word\'97 
\f0\i [Going up to her.]
\f1\i0  Keep your little Christmas secrets to yourself, my darling. They will all be revealed tonight when the Christmas Tree is lit, no doubt.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Did you remember to invite Doctor Rank?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No. But there is no need; as a matter of course he will come to dinner with us. However, I will ask him when he comes in this morning. I have ordered some good wine. Nora, you can\'92t think how I am looking forward to this evening.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 So am I! And how the children will enjoy themselves, Torvald!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe appointment, and a big enough income. It\'92s delightful to think of, isn\'92t it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It\'92s wonderful!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Do you remember last Christmas? For a full three weeks beforehand you shut yourself up every evening until long after midnight, making ornaments for the Christmas Tree, and all the other fine things that were to be a surprise to us. It was the dullest three weeks I ever spent!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I didn\'92t find it dull.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling]
\f1\i0 . But there was precious little result, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, you shouldn\'92t tease me about that again. How could I help the cat\'92s going in and tearing everything to pieces?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Of course you couldn\'92t, poor little girl. You had the best of intentions to please us all, and that\'92s the main thing. But it is a good thing that our hard times are over.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, it is really wonderful.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 This time I needn\'92t sit here and be dull all alone, and you needn\'92t ruin your dear eyes and your pretty little hands\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [clapping her hands]
\f1\i0 . No, Torvald, I needn\'92t any longer, need I! It\'92s wonderfully lovely to hear you say so! 
\f0\i [Taking his arm.]
\f1\i0  Now I will tell you how I have been thinking we ought to arrange things, Torvald. As soon as Christmas is over\'97
\f0\i [A bell rings in the hall.]
\f1\i0  There\'92s the bell. 
\f0\i [She tidies the room a little.]
\f1\i0  There\'92s some one at the door. What a nuisance!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 If it is a caller, remember I am not at home.\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in the doorway]
\f1\i0 . A lady to see you, ma\'92am,\'97a stranger.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Ask her to come in.\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [to HELMER]
\f1\i0 . The doctor came at the same time, sir.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Did he go straight into my room?\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Yes, sir.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [HELMER goes into his room. The MAID ushers in Mrs Linde, who is in travelling dress, and shuts the door.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a dejected and timid voice]
\f1\i0 . How do you do, Nora?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [doubtfully]
\f1\i0 . How do you do\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You don\'92t recognise me, I suppose.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I don\'92t know\'97yes, to be sure, I seem to\'97
\f0\i [Suddenly.]
\f1\i0  Yes! Christine! Is it really you?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, it is I.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Christine! To think of my not recognising you! And yet how could I\'97
\f0\i [In a gentle voice.]
\f1\i0  How you have altered, Christine!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I have indeed. In nine, ten long years\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Is it so long since we met? I suppose it is. The last eight years have been a happy time for me, I can tell you. And so now you have come into the town, and have taken this long journey in winter\'97that was plucky of you.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I arrived by steamer this morning.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 To have some fun at Christmas-time, of course. How delightful! We will have such fun together! But take off your things. You are not cold, I hope. 
\f0\i [Helps her.]
\f1\i0  Now we will sit down by the stove, and be cosy. No, take this armchair; I will sit here in the rocking-chair. 
\f0\i [Takes her hands.]
\f1\i0  Now you look like your old self again; it was only the first moment\'97You are a little paler, Christine, and perhaps a little thinner.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And much, much older, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Perhaps a little older; very, very little; certainly not much. 
\f0\i [Stops suddenly and speaks seriously.]
\f1\i0  What a thoughtless creature I am, chattering away like this. My poor, dear Christine, do forgive me.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean, Nora?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [gently]
\f1\i0 . Poor Christine, you are a widow.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes; it is three years ago now.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I knew; I saw it in the papers. I assure you, Christine, I meant ever so often to write to you at the time, but I always put it off and something always prevented me.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I quite understand, dear.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It was very bad of me, Christine. Poor thing, how you must have suffered. And he left you nothing?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And no children?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Nothing at all, then.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Not even any sorrow or grief to live upon.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking incredulously at her]
\f1\i0 . But, Christine, is that possible?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiles sadly and strokes her hair]
\f1\i0 . It sometimes happens, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 So you are quite alone. How dreadfully sad that must be. I have three lovely children. You can\'92t see them just now, for they are out with their nurse. But now you must tell me all about it.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, no; I want to hear about you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, you must begin. I mustn\'92t be selfish today; today I must only think of your affairs. But there is one thing I must tell you. Do you know we have just had a great piece of good luck?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, what is it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Just fancy, my husband has been made manager of the Bank!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Your husband? What good luck!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, tremendous! A barrister\'92s profession is such an uncertain thing, especially if he won\'92t undertake unsavoury cases; and naturally Torvald has never been willing to do that, and I quite agree with him. You may imagine how pleased we are! He is to take up his work in the Bank at the New Year, and then he will have a big salary and lots of commissions. For the future we can live quite differently\'97we can do just as we like. I feel so relieved and so happy, Christine! It will be splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety, won\'92t it?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, anyhow I think it would be delightful to have what one needs.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, not only what one needs, but heaps and heaps of money.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling]
\f1\i0 . Nora, Nora, haven\'92t you learned sense yet? In our schooldays you were a great spendthrift.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [laughing]
\f1\i0 . Yes, that is what Torvald says now. 
\f0\i [Wags her finger at her.]
\f1\i0  But \'93Nora, Nora\'94 is not so silly as you think. We have not been in a position for me to waste money. We have both had to work.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You too?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes; odds and ends, needlework, crotchet-work, embroidery, and that kind of thing. 
\f0\i [Dropping her voice.]
\f1\i0  And other things as well. You know Torvald left his office when we were married? There was no prospect of promotion there, and he had to try and earn more than before. But during the first year he over-worked himself dreadfully. You see, he had to make money every way he could, and he worked early and late; but he couldn\'92t stand it, and fell dreadfully ill, and the doctors said it was necessary for him to go south.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You spent a whole year in Italy, didn\'92t you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes. It was no easy matter to get away, I can tell you. It was just after Ivar was born; but naturally we had to go. It was a wonderfully beautiful journey, and it saved Torvald\'92s life. But it cost a tremendous lot of money, Christine.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 So I should think.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It cost about two hundred and fifty pounds. That\'92s a lot, isn\'92t it?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and in emergencies like that it is lucky to have the money.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I ought to tell you that we had it from papa.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Oh, I see. It was just about that time that he died, wasn\'92t it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes; and, just think of it, I couldn\'92t go and nurse him. I was expecting little Ivar\'92s birth every day and I had my poor sick Torvald to look after. My dear, kind father\'97I never saw him again, Christine. That was the saddest time I have known since our marriage.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I know how fond you were of him. And then you went off to Italy?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our going, so we started a month later.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And your husband came back quite well?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 As sound as a bell!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But\'97the doctor?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What doctor?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here just as I did, was the doctor?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, that was Doctor Rank, but he doesn\'92t come here professionally. He is our greatest friend, and comes in at least once every day. No, Torvald has not had an hour\'92s illness since then, and our children are strong and healthy and so am I. 
\f0\i [Jumps up and claps her hands.]
\f1\i0  Christine! Christine! it\'92s good to be alive and happy!\'97But how horrid of me; I am talking of nothing but my own affairs. 
\f0\i [Sits on a stool near her, and rests her arms on her knees.]
\f1\i0  You mustn\'92t be angry with me. Tell me, is it really true that you did not love your husband? Why did you marry him?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 My mother was alive then, and was bedridden and helpless, and I had to provide for my two younger brothers; so I did not think I was justified in refusing his offer.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, perhaps you were quite right. He was rich at that time, then?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I believe he was quite well off. But his business was a precarious one; and, when he died, it all went to pieces and there was nothing left.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And then?\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Well, I had to turn my hand to anything I could find\'97first a small shop, then a small school, and so on. The last three years have seemed like one long working-day, with no rest. Now it is at an end, Nora. My poor mother needs me no more, for she is gone; and the boys do not need me either; they have got situations and can shift for themselves.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What a relief you must feel if\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, indeed; I only feel my life unspeakably empty. No one to live for anymore. 
\f0\i [Gets up restlessly.]
\f1\i0  That was why I could not stand the life in my little backwater any longer. I hope it may be easier here to find something which will busy me and occupy my thoughts. If only I could have the good luck to get some regular work\'97office work of some kind\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But, Christine, that is so frightfully tiring, and you look tired out now. You had far better go away to some watering-place.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [walking to the window]
\f1\i0 . I have no father to give me money for a journey, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [rising]
\f1\i0 . Oh, don\'92t be angry with me!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going up to her]
\f1\i0 . It is you that must not be angry with me, dear. The worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so bitter. No one to work for, and yet obliged to be always on the lookout for chances. One must live, and so one becomes selfish. When you told me of the happy turn your fortunes have taken\'97you will hardly believe it\'97I was delighted not so much on your account as on my own.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How do you mean?\'97Oh, I understand. You mean that perhaps Torvald could get you something to do.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, that was what I was thinking of.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 He must, Christine. Just leave it to me; I will broach the subject very cleverly\'97I will think of something that will please him very much. It will make me so happy to be of some use to you.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 How kind you are, Nora, to be so anxious to help me! It is doubly kind in you, for you know so little of the burdens and troubles of life.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I\'97? I know so little of them?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling]
\f1\i0 . My dear! Small household cares and that sort of thing!\'97You are a child, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [tosses her head and crosses the stage]
\f1\i0 . You ought not to be so superior.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You are just like the others. They all think that I am incapable of anything really serious\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Come, come\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 \'97that I have gone through nothing in this world of cares.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But, my dear Nora, you have just told me all your troubles.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Pooh!\'97those were trifles. 
\f0\i [Lowering her voice.]
\f1\i0  I have not told you the important thing.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 The important thing? What do you mean?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You look down upon me altogether, Christine\'97but you ought not to. You are proud, aren\'92t you, of having worked so hard and so long for your mother?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Indeed, I don\'92t look down on anyone. But it is true that I am both proud and glad to think that I was privileged to make the end of my mother\'92s life almost free from care.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And you are proud to think of what you have done for your brothers?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I think I have the right to be.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I think so, too. But now, listen to this; I too have something to be proud and glad of.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I have no doubt you have. But what do you refer to?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Speak low. Suppose Torvald were to hear! He mustn\'92t on any account\'97no one in the world must know, Christine, except you.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But what is it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Come here. 
\f0\i [Pulls her down on the sofa beside her.]
\f1\i0  Now I will show you that I too have something to be proud and glad of. It was I who saved Torvald\'92s life.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 \'93Saved\'94? How?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I told you about our trip to Italy. Torvald would never have recovered if he had not gone there\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but your father gave you the necessary funds.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling]
\f1\i0 . Yes, that is what Torvald and all the others think, but\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Papa didn\'92t give us a shilling. It was I who procured the money.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You? All that large sum?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Two hundred and fifty pounds. What do you think of that?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But, Nora, how could you possibly do it? Did you win a prize in the Lottery?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [contemptuously]
\f1\i0 . In the Lottery? There would have been no credit in that.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But where did you get it from, then? Nora 
\f0\i [humming and smiling with an air of mystery]
\f1\i0 . Hm, hm! Aha!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Because you couldn\'92t have borrowed it.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Couldn\'92t I? Why not?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, a wife cannot borrow without her husband\'92s consent.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [tossing her head]
\f1\i0 . Oh, if it is a wife who has any head for business\'97a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I don\'92t understand it at all, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 There is no need you should. I never said I had borrowed the money. I may have got it some other way. 
\f0\i [Lies back on the sofa.]
\f1\i0  Perhaps I got it from some other admirer. When anyone is as attractive as I am\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You are a mad creature.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Now, you know you\'92re full of curiosity, Christine.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Listen to me, Nora dear. Haven\'92t you been a little bit imprudent?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sits up straight]
\f1\i0 . Is it imprudent to save your husband\'92s life?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 It seems to me imprudent, without his knowledge, to\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! My goodness, can\'92t you understand that? It was necessary he should have no idea what a dangerous condition he was in. It was to me that the doctors came and said that his life was in danger, and that the only thing to save him was to live in the south. Do you suppose I didn\'92t try, first of all, to get what I wanted as if it were for myself? I told him how much I should love to travel abroad like other young wives; I tried tears and entreaties with him; I told him that he ought to remember the condition I was in, and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me; I even hinted that he might raise a loan. That nearly made him angry, Christine. He said I was thoughtless, and that it was his duty as my husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices\'97as I believe he called them. Very well, I thought, you must be saved\'97and that was how I came to devise a way out of the difficulty\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And did your husband never get to know from your father that the money had not come from him?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, never. Papa died just at that time. I had meant to let him into the secret and beg him never to reveal it. But he was so ill then\'97alas, there never was any need to tell him.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And since then have you never told your secret to your husband?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Good Heavens, no! How could you think so? A man who has such strong opinions about these things! And besides, how painful and humiliating it would be for Torvald, with his manly independence, to know that he owed me anything! It would upset our mutual relations altogether; our beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Do you mean never to tell him about it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [meditatively, and with a half smile]
\f1\i0 . Yes\'97someday, perhaps, after many years, when I am no longer as nice-looking as I am now. Don\'92t laugh at me! I mean, of course, when Torvald is no longer as devoted to me as he is now; when my dancing and dressing-up and reciting have palled on him; then it may be a good thing to have something in reserve\'97
\f0\i [Breaking off.]
\f1\i0  What nonsense! That time will never come. Now, what do you think of my great secret, Christine? Do you still think I am of no use? I can tell you, too, that this affair has caused me a lot of worry. It has been by no means easy for me to meet my engagements punctually. I may tell you that there is something that is called, in business, quarterly interest, and another thing called payment in installments, and it is always so dreadfully difficult to manage them. I have had to save a little here and there, where I could, you understand. I have not been able to put aside much from my housekeeping money, for Torvald must have a good table. I couldn\'92t let my children be shabbily dressed; I have felt obliged to use up all he gave me for them, the sweet little darlings!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 So it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of life, poor Nora?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Of course. Besides, I was the one responsible for it. Whenever Torvald has given me money for new dresses and such things, I have never spent more than half of it; I have always bought the simplest and cheapest things. Thank Heaven, any clothes look well on me, and so Torvald has never noticed it. But it was often very hard on me, Christine\'97because it is delightful to be really well dressed, isn\'92t it?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Quite so.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Well, then I have found other ways of earning money. Last winter I was lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do; so I locked myself up and sat writing every evening until quite late at night. Many a time I was desperately tired; but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to sit there working and earning money. It was like being a man.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 How much have you been able to pay off in that way?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I can\'92t tell you exactly. You see, it is very difficult to keep an account of a business matter of that kind. I only know that I have paid every penny that I could scrape together. Many a time I was at my wits\'92 end. 
\f0\i [Smiles.]
\f1\i0  Then I used to sit here and imagine that a rich old gentleman had fallen in love with me\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 What! Who was it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Be quiet!\'97that he had died; and that when his will was opened it contained, written in big letters, the instruction: \'93The lovely Mrs Nora Helmer is to have all I possess paid over to her at once in cash.\'94\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But, my dear Nora\'97who could the man be?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Good gracious, can\'92t you understand? There was no old gentleman at all; it was only something that I used to sit here and imagine, when I couldn\'92t think of any way of procuring money. But it\'92s all the same now; the tiresome old person can stay where he is, as far as I am concerned; I don\'92t care about him or his will either, for I am free from care now. 
\f0\i [Jumps up.]
\f1\i0  My goodness, it\'92s delightful to think of, Christine! Free from care! To be able to be free from care, quite free from care; to be able to play and romp with the children; to be able to keep the house beautifully and have everything just as Torvald likes it! And, think of it, soon the spring will come and the big blue sky! Perhaps we shall be able to take a little trip\'97perhaps I shall see the sea again! Oh, it\'92s a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy. 
\f0\i [A bell is heard in the hall.]
\f1\i0 \
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [rising]
\f1\i0 . There is the bell; perhaps I had better go.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, don\'92t go; no one will come in here; it is sure to be for Torvald.\
SERVANT.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [at the hall door]
\f1\i0 . Excuse me, ma\'92am\'97there is a gentleman to see the master, and as the doctor is with him\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Who is it?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [at the door]
\f1\i0 . It is I, Mrs Helmer. 
\f0\i [Mrs LINDE starts, trembles, and turns to the window.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [takes a step towards him, and speaks in a strained, low voice]
\f1\i0 . You? What is it? What do you want to see my husband about?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Bank business\'97in a way. I have a small post in the Bank, and I hear your husband is to be our chief now\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Then it is\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Nothing but dry business matters, Mrs Helmer; absolutely nothing else.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Be so good as to go into the study, then. 
\f0\i [She bows indifferently to him and shuts the door into the hall; then comes back and makes up the fire in the stove.]
\f1\i0 \
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nora\'97who was that man?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 A lawyer, of the name of Krogstad.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Then it really was he.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Do you know the man?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I used to\'97many years ago. At one time he was a solicitor\'92s clerk in our town.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, he was.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 He is greatly altered.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 He made a very unhappy marriage.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 He is a widower now, isn\'92t he?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 With several children. There now, it is burning up. [Shuts the door of the stove and moves the rocking-chair aside.]\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 They say he carries on various kinds of business.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Really! Perhaps he does; I don\'92t know anything about it. But don\'92t let us think of business; it is so tiresome.\
DOCTOR RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [comes out of HELMER\'92S study. Before he shuts the door he calls to him]
\f1\i0 . No, my dear fellow, I won\'92t disturb you; I would rather go in to your wife for a little while. 
\f0\i [Shuts the door and sees Mrs LINDE.]
\f1\i0  I beg your pardon; I am afraid I am disturbing you too.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, not at all. 
\f0\i [Introducing him]
\f1\i0 . Doctor Rank, Mrs Linde.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I have often heard Mrs Linde\'92s name mentioned here. I think I passed you on the stairs when I arrived, Mrs Linde?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I go up very slowly; I can\'92t manage stairs well.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Ah! some slight internal weakness?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, the fact is I have been overworking myself.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Nothing more than that? Then I suppose you have come to town to amuse yourself with our entertainments?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I have come to look for work.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Is that a good cure for overwork?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 One must live, Doctor Rank.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Look here, Doctor Rank\'97you know you want to live.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Certainly. However wretched I may feel, I want to prolong the agony as long as possible. All my patients are like that. And so are those who are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case too, is at this very moment with Helmer\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sadly]
\f1\i0 . Ah!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Whom do you mean?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 A lawyer of the name of Krogstad, a fellow you don\'92t know at all. He suffers from a diseased moral character, Mrs Helmer; but even he began talking of its being highly important that he should live.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Did he? What did he want to speak to Torvald about?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I have no idea; I only heard that it was something about the Bank.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I didn\'92t know this\'97what\'92s his name\'97Krogstad had anything to do with the Bank.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, he has some sort of appointment there. 
\f0\i [To Mrs Linde.]
\f1\i0  I don\'92t know whether you find also in your part of the world that there are certain people who go zealously snuffing about to smell out moral corruption, and, as soon as they have found some, put the person concerned into some lucrative position where they can keep their eye on him. Healthy natures are left out in the cold.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Still I think the sick are those who most need taking care of.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [shrugging his shoulders]
\f1\i0 . Yes, there you are. That is the sentiment that is turning Society into a sick-house.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [NORA, who has been absorbed in her thoughts, breaks out into smothered laughter and claps her hands.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 RANK.\uc0\u8232 Why do you laugh at that? Have you any notion what Society really is?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do I care about tiresome Society? I am laughing at something quite different, something extremely amusing. Tell me, Doctor Rank, are all the people who are employed in the Bank dependent on Torvald now?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Is that what you find so extremely amusing?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling and humming]
\f1\i0 . That\'92s my affair! 
\f0\i [Walking about the room.]
\f1\i0  It\'92s perfectly glorious to think that we have\'97that Torvald has so much power over so many people. 
\f0\i [Takes the packet from her pocket.]
\f1\i0  Doctor Rank, what do you say to a macaroon?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 What, macaroons? I thought they were forbidden here.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but these are some Christine gave me.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 What! I?\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, well, don\'92t be alarmed! You couldn\'92t know that Torvald had forbidden them. I must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my teeth. But, bah!\'97once in a way\'97That\'92s so, isn\'92t it, Doctor Rank? By your leave! 
\f0\i [Puts a macaroon into his mouth.]
\f1\i0  You must have one too, Christine. And I shall have one, just a little one\'97or at most two. 
\f0\i [Walking about.]
\f1\i0  I am tremendously happy. There is just one thing in the world now that I should dearly love to do.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Well, what is that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It\'92s something I should dearly love to say, if Torvald could hear me.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Well, why can\'92t you say it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I daren\'92t; it\'92s so shocking.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Shocking?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Well, I should not advise you to say it. Still, with us you might. What is it you would so much like to say if Torvald could hear you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I should just love to say\'97Well, I\'92m damned!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Are you mad?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nora, dear\'97!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Say it, here he is!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [hiding the packet]
\f1\i0 . Hush! Hush! Hush! 
\f0\i [HELMER comes out of his room, with his coat over his arm and his hat in his hand.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Well, Torvald dear, have you got rid of him?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, he has just gone.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Let me introduce you\'97this is Christine, who has come to town.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Christine\'97? Excuse me, but I don\'92t know\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Mrs Linde, dear; Christine Linde.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Of course. A school friend of my wife\'92s, I presume?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, we have known each other since then.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And just think, she has taken a long journey in order to see you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, really, I\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Christine is tremendously clever at book-keeping, and she is frightfully anxious to work under some clever man, so as to perfect herself\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Very sensible, Mrs Linde.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And when she heard you had been appointed manager of the Bank\'97the news was telegraphed, you know\'97she travelled here as quick as she could. Torvald, I am sure you will be able to do something for Christine, for my sake, won\'92t you?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well, it is not altogether impossible. I presume you are a widow, Mrs Linde?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And have had some experience of book-keeping?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, a fair amount.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Ah! well, it\'92s very likely I may be able to find something for you\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [clapping her hands]
\f1\i0 . What did I tell you? What did I tell you?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You have just come at a fortunate moment, Mrs Linde.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 How am I to thank you?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 There is no need. 
\f0\i [Puts on his coat.]
\f1\i0  But today you must excuse me\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Wait a minute; I will come with you. 
\f0\i [Brings his fur coat from the hall and warms it at the fire.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t be long away, Torvald dear.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 About an hour, not more.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Are you going too, Christine?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting on her cloak]
\f1\i0 . Yes, I must go and look for a room.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Oh, well then, we can walk down the street together.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [helping her]
\f1\i0 . What a pity it is we are so short of space here; I am afraid it is impossible for us\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Please don\'92t think of it! Goodbye, Nora dear, and many thanks.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Goodbye for the present. Of course you will come back this evening. And you too, Dr. Rank. What do you say? If you are well enough? Oh, you must be! Wrap yourself up well. 
\f0\i [They go to the door all talking together. Children\'92s voices are heard on the staircase.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 There they are! There they are! 
\f0\i [She runs to open the door. The NURSE comes in with the children.]
\f1\i0  Come in! Come in! 
\f0\i [Stoops and kisses them.]
\f1\i0  Oh, you sweet blessings! Look at them, Christine! Aren\'92t they darlings?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t let us stand here in the draught.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Come along, Mrs Linde; the place will only be bearable for a mother now!\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [RANK, HELMER, and Mrs Linde go downstairs. The NURSE comes forward with the children; NORA shuts the hall door.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NORA.\uc0\u8232 How fresh and well you look! Such red cheeks like apples and roses. 
\f0\i [The children all talk at once while she speaks to them.]
\f1\i0  Have you had great fun? That\'92s splendid! What, you pulled both Emmy and Bob along on the sledge? \'97both at once?\'97that was good. You are a clever boy, Ivar. Let me take her for a little, Anne. My sweet little baby doll! 
\f0\i [Takes the baby from the MAID and dances it up and down.]
\f1\i0  Yes, yes, mother will dance with Bob too. What! Have you been snowballing? I wish I had been there too! No, no, I will take their things off, Anne; please let me do it, it is such fun. Go in now, you look half frozen. There is some hot coffee for you on the stove.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [The NURSE goes into the room on the left. NORA takes off the children\'92s things and throws them about, while they all talk to her at once.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NORA.\uc0\u8232 Really! Did a big dog run after you? But it didn\'92t bite you? No, dogs don\'92t bite nice little dolly children. You mustn\'92t look at the parcels, Ivar. What are they? Ah, I daresay you would like to know. No, no\'97it\'92s something nasty! Come, let us have a game! What shall we play at? Hide and Seek? Yes, we\'92ll play Hide and Seek. Bob shall hide first. Must I hide? Very well, I\'92ll hide first. 
\f0\i [She and the children laugh and shout, and romp in and out of the room; at last NORA hides under the table, the children rush in and out for her, but do not see her; they hear her smothered laughter, run to the table, lift up the cloth and find her. Shouts of laughter. She crawls forward and pretends to frighten them. Fresh laughter. Meanwhile there has been a knock at the hall door, but none of them has noticed it. The door is half opened, and KROGSTAD appears, he waits a little; the game goes on.]
\f1\i0 \
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Excuse me, Mrs Helmer.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [with a stifled cry, turns round and gets up on to her knees]
\f1\i0 . Ah! what do you want?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Excuse me, the outer door was ajar; I suppose someone forgot to shut it.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [rising]
\f1\i0 . My husband is out, Mr. Krogstad.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I know that.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you want here, then?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 A word with you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 With me?\'97
\f0\i [To the children, gently.]
\f1\i0  Go in to nurse. What? No, the strange man won\'92t do mother any harm. When he has gone we will have another game. 
\f0\i [She takes the children into the room on the left, and shuts the door after them.]
\f1\i0  You want to speak to me?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I do.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Today? It is not the first of the month yet.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 No, it is Christmas Eve, and it will depend on yourself what sort of a Christmas you will spend.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean? Today it is absolutely impossible for me\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 We won\'92t talk about that until later on. This is something different. I presume you can give me a moment?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes\'97yes, I can\'97although\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Good. I was in Olsen\'92s Restaurant and saw your husband going down the street\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 With a lady.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What then?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 May I make so bold as to ask if it was a Mrs Linde?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It was.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Just arrived in town?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, today.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 She is a great friend of yours, isn\'92t she?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 She is. But I don\'92t see\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I knew her too, once upon a time.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am aware of that.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Are you? So you know all about it; I thought as much. Then I can ask you, without beating about the bush\'97is Mrs Linde to have an appointment in the Bank?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What right have you to question me, Mr. Krogstad?\'97You, one of my husband\'92s subordinates! But since you ask, you shall know. Yes, Mrs Linde is to have an appointment. And it was I who pleaded her cause, Mr. Krogstad, let me tell you that.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I was right in what I thought, then.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [walking up and down the stage]
\f1\i0 . Sometimes one has a tiny little bit of influence, I should hope. Because one is a woman, it does not necessarily follow that\'97. When anyone is in a subordinate position, Mr. Krogstad, they should really be careful to avoid offending anyone who\'97who\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Who has influence?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Exactly.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [changing his tone]
\f1\i0 . Mrs Helmer, you will be so good as to use your influence on my behalf.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What? What do you mean?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 You will be so kind as to see that I am allowed to keep my subordinate position in the Bank.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean by that? Who proposes to take your post away from you?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Oh, there is no necessity to keep up the pretence of ignorance. I can quite understand that your friend is not very anxious to expose herself to the chance of rubbing shoulders with me; and I quite understand, too, whom I have to thank for being turned off.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But I assure you\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Very likely; but, to come to the point, the time has come when I should advise you to use your influence to prevent that.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But, Mr. Krogstad, I have no influence.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Haven\'92t you? I thought you said yourself just now\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Naturally I did not mean you to put that construction on it. I! What should make you think I have any influence of that kind with my husband?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Oh, I have known your husband from our student days. I don\'92t suppose he is any more unassailable than other husbands.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 If you speak slightingly of my husband, I shall turn you out of the house.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 You are bold, Mrs Helmer.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am not afraid of you any longer. As soon as the New Year comes, I shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [controlling himself]
\f1\i0 . Listen to me, Mrs Helmer. If necessary, I am prepared to fight for my small post in the Bank as if I were fighting for my life.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 So it seems.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 It is not only for the sake of the money; indeed, that weighs least with me in the matter. There is another reason\'97well, I may as well tell you. My position is this. I daresay you know, like everybody else, that once, many years ago, I was guilty of an indiscretion.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I think I have heard something of the kind.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 The matter never came into court; but every way seemed to be closed to me after that. So I took to the business that you know of. I had to do something; and, honestly, I don\'92t think I\'92ve been one of the worst. But now I must cut myself free from all that. My sons are growing up; for their sake I must try and win back as much respect as I can in the town. This post in the Bank was like the first step up for me\'97and now your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But you must believe me, Mr. Krogstad; it is not in my power to help you at all.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Then it is because you haven\'92t the will; but I have means to compel you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You don\'92t mean that you will tell my husband that I owe you money?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Hm!\'97suppose I were to tell him?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It would be perfectly infamous of you. 
\f0\i [Sobbing.]
\f1\i0  To think of his learning my secret, which has been my joy and pride, in such an ugly, clumsy way\'97that he should learn it from you! And it would put me in a horribly disagreeable position\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Only disagreeable?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [impetuously]
\f1\i0 . Well, do it, then!\'97and it will be the worse for you. My husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are, and you certainly won\'92t keep your post then.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that you were afraid of?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 If my husband does get to know of it, of course he will at once pay you what is still owing, and we shall have nothing more to do with you.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [coming a step nearer]
\f1\i0 . Listen to me, Mrs Helmer. Either you have a very bad memory or you know very little of business. I shall be obliged to remind you of a few details.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 When your husband was ill, you came to me to borrow two hundred and fifty pounds.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I didn\'92t know anyone else to go to.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I promised to get you that amount\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and you did so.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I promised to get you that amount, on certain conditions. Your mind was so taken up with your husband\'92s illness, and you were so anxious to get the money for your journey, that you seem to have paid no attention to the conditions of our bargain. Therefore it will not be amiss if I remind you of them. Now, I promised to get the money on the security of a bond which I drew up.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and which I signed.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Good. But below your signature there were a few lines constituting your father a surety for the money; those lines your father should have signed.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Should? He did sign them.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I had left the date blank; that is to say, your father should himself have inserted the date on which he signed the paper. Do you remember that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I think I remember\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Then I gave you the bond to send by post to your father. Is that not so?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 And you naturally did so at once, because five or six days afterwards you brought me the bond with your father\'92s signature. And then I gave you the money.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Well, haven\'92t I been paying it off regularly?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Fairly so, yes. But\'97to come back to the matter in hand\'97that must have been a very trying time for you, Mrs Helmer?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It was, indeed.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Your father was very ill, wasn\'92t he?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 He was very near his end.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 And died soon afterwards?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Tell me, Mrs Helmer, can you by any chance remember what day your father died?\'97on what day of the month, I mean.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Papa died on the 29th of September.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 That is correct; I have ascertained it for myself. And, as that is so, there is a discrepancy 
\f0\i [taking a paper from his pocket]
\f1\i0  which I cannot account for.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What discrepancy? I don\'92t know\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 The discrepancy consists, Mrs Helmer, in the fact that your father signed this bond three days after his death.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean? I don\'92t understand\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Your father died on the 29th of September. But, look here; your father has dated his signature the 2nd of October. It is a discrepancy, isn\'92t it? 
\f0\i [NORA is silent.]
\f1\i0  Can you explain it to me? 
\f0\i [NORA is still silent.]
\f1\i0  It is a remarkable thing, too, that the words \'932nd of October,\'94 as well as the year, are not written in your father\'92s handwriting but in one that I think I know. Well, of course it can be explained; your father may have forgotten to date his signature, and someone else may have dated it haphazard before they knew of his death. There is no harm in that. It all depends on the signature of the name; and that is genuine, I suppose, Mrs Helmer? It was your father himself who signed his name here?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [after a short pause, throws her head up and looks defiantly at him]
\f1\i0 . No, it was not. It was I that wrote papa\'92s name.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Are you aware that is a dangerous confession?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 In what way? You shall have your money soon.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Let me ask you a question; why did you not send the paper to your father?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It was impossible; papa was so ill. If I had asked him for his signature, I should have had to tell him what the money was to be used for; and when he was so ill himself I couldn\'92t tell him that my husband\'92s life was in danger\'97it was impossible.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 It would have been better for you if you had given up your trip abroad.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, that was impossible. That trip was to save my husband\'92s life; I couldn\'92t give that up.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 But did it never occur to you that you were committing a fraud on me?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I couldn\'92t take that into account; I didn\'92t trouble myself about you at all. I couldn\'92t bear you, because you put so many heartless difficulties in my way, although you knew what a dangerous condition my husband was in.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Mrs Helmer, you evidently do not realise clearly what it is that you have been guilty of. But I can assure you that my one false step, which lost me all my reputation, was nothing more or nothing worse than what you have done.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You? Do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run a risk to save your wife\'92s life?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 The law cares nothing about motives.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Then it must be a very foolish law.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Foolish or not, it is the law by which you will be judged, if I produce this paper in court.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I don\'92t believe it. Is a daughter not to be allowed to spare her dying father anxiety and care? Is a wife not to be allowed to save her husband\'92s life? I don\'92t know much about law; but I am certain that there must be laws permitting such things as that. Have you no knowledge of such laws\'97you who are a lawyer? You must be a very poor lawyer, Mr. Krogstad.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Maybe. But matters of business\'97such business as you and I have had together\'97do you think I don\'92t understand that? Very well. Do as you please. But let me tell you this\'97if I lose my position a second time, you shall lose yours with me. 
\f0\i [He bows, and goes out through the hall.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [appears buried in thought for a short time, then tosses her head]
\f1\i0 . Nonsense! Trying to frighten me like that!\'97I am not so silly as he thinks. 
\f0\i [Begins to busy herself putting the children\'92s things in order.]
\f1\i0  And yet\'97? No, it\'92s impossible! I did it for love\'92s sake.\
THE CHILDREN.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in the doorway on the left]
\f1\i0 . Mother, the stranger man has gone out through the gate.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, dears, I know. But, don\'92t tell anyone about the stranger man. Do you hear? Not even papa.\
CHILDREN.\uc0\u8232 No, mother; but will you come and play again?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, no,\'97not now.\
CHILDREN.\uc0\u8232 But, mother, you promised us.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but I can\'92t now. Run away in; I have such a lot to do. Run away in, my sweet little darlings. 
\f0\i [She gets them into the room by degrees and shuts the door on them; then sits down on the sofa, takes up a piece of needlework and sews a few stitches, but soon stops.]
\f1\i0  No! 
\f0\i [Throws down the work, gets up, goes to the hall door and calls out.]
\f1\i0  Helen! bring the Tree in. 
\f0\i [Goes to the table on the left, opens a drawer, and stops again.]
\f1\i0  No, no! it is quite impossible!\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [coming in with the Tree]
\f1\i0 . Where shall I put it, ma\'92am?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Here, in the middle of the floor.\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Shall I get you anything else?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, thank you. I have all I want. [Exit MAID.]\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [begins dressing the tree]
\f1\i0 . A candle here-and flowers here\'97The horrible man! It\'92s all nonsense\'97there\'92s nothing wrong. The tree shall be splendid! I will do everything I can think of to please you, Torvald!\'97I will sing for you, dance for you\'97
\f0\i [HELMER comes in with some papers under his arm.]
\f1\i0  Oh! are you back already?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes. Has anyone been here?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Here? No.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That is strange. I saw Krogstad going out of the gate.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Did you? Oh yes, I forgot, Krogstad was here for a moment.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora, I can see from your manner that he has been here begging you to say a good word for him.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And you were to appear to do it of your own accord; you were to conceal from me the fact of his having been here; didn\'92t he beg that of you too?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, Torvald, but\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora, Nora, and you would be a party to that sort of thing? To have any talk with a man like that, and give him any sort of promise? And to tell me a lie into the bargain?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 A lie\'97?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Didn\'92t you tell me no one had been here? 
\f0\i [Shakes his finger at her.]
\f1\i0  My little songbird must never do that again. A songbird must have a clean beak to chirp with\'97no false notes! 
\f0\i [Puts his arm round her waist.]
\f1\i0  That is so, isn\'92t it? Yes, I am sure it is. 
\f0\i [Lets her go.]
\f1\i0  We will say no more about it. 
\f0\i [Sits down by the stove.]
\f1\i0  How warm and snug it is here! 
\f0\i [Turns over his papers.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [after a short pause, during which she busies herself with the Christmas Tree.]
\f1\i0  Torvald!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am looking forward tremendously to the fancy-dress ball at the Stenborgs\'92 the day after tomorrow.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And I am tremendously curious to see what you are going to surprise me with.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It was very silly of me to want to do that.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I can\'92t hit upon anything that will do; everything I think of seems so silly and insignificant.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Does my little Nora acknowledge that at last?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [standing behind his chair with her arms on the back of it]
\f1\i0 . Are you very busy, Torvald?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What are all those papers?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Bank business.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Already?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 I have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake the necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work; and I must make use of the Christmas week for that, so as to have everything in order for the new year.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Then that was why this poor Krogstad\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Hm!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [leans against the back of his chair and strokes his hair]
\f1\i0 . If you hadn\'92t been so busy I should have asked you a tremendously big favour, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What is that? Tell me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 There is no one has such good taste as you. And I do so want to look nice at the fancy-dress ball. Torvald, couldn\'92t you take me in hand and decide what I shall go as, and what sort of a dress I shall wear?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to get someone to come to her rescue?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, Torvald, I can\'92t get along a bit without your help.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Very well, I will think it over, we shall manage to hit upon something.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That is nice of you. 
\f0\i [Goes to the Christmas Tree. A short pause.]
\f1\i0  How pretty the red flowers look\'97. But, tell me, was it really something very bad that this Krogstad was guilty of?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 He forged someone\'92s name. Have you any idea what that means?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Isn\'92t it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes; or, as in so many cases, by imprudence. I am not so heartless as to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step of that kind.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, you wouldn\'92t, would you, Torvald?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Many a man has been able to retrieve his character, if he has openly confessed his fault and taken his punishment.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Punishment\'97?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But Krogstad did nothing of that sort; he got himself out of it by a cunning trick, and that is why he has gone under altogether.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But do you think it would\'97?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Just think how a guilty man like that has to lie and play the hypocrite with every one, how he has to wear a mask in the presence of those near and dear to him, even before his own wife and children. And about the children\'97that is the most terrible part of it all, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Because such an atmosphere of lies infects and poisons the whole life of a home. Each breath the children take in such a house is full of the germs of evil.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [coming nearer him]
\f1\i0 . Are you sure of that?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 My dear, I have often seen it in the course of my life as a lawyer. Almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a deceitful mother.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Why do you only say\'97mother?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It seems most commonly to be the mother\'92s influence, though naturally a bad father\'92s would have the same result. Every lawyer is familiar with the fact. This Krogstad, now, has been persistently poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation; that is why I say he has lost all moral character. 
\f0\i [Holds out his hands to her.]
\f1\i0  That is why my sweet little Nora must promise me not to plead his cause. Give me your hand on it. Come, come, what is this? Give me your hand. There now, that\'92s settled. I assure you it would be quite impossible for me to work with him; I literally feel physically ill when I am in the company of such people.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [takes her hand out of his and goes to the opposite side of the Christmas Tree]
\f1\i0 . How hot it is in here; and I have such a lot to do.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [getting up and putting his papers in order]
\f1\i0 . Yes, and I must try and read through some of these before dinner; and I must think about your costume, too. And it is just possible I may have something ready in gold paper to hang up on the Tree. 
\f0\i [Puts his hand on her head.]
\f1\i0  My precious little singing-bird! 
\f0\i [He goes into his room and shuts the door after him.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [after a pause, whispers]
\f1\i0 . No, no\'97it isn\'92t true. It\'92s impossible; it must be impossible.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [The NURSE opens the door on the left.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NURSE.\uc0\u8232 The little ones are begging so hard to be allowed to come in to mamma.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, no, no! Don\'92t let them come in to me! You stay with them, Anne.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 Very well, ma\'92am. 
\f0\i [Shuts the door.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [pale with terror]
\f1\i0 . Deprave my little children? Poison my home? 
\f0\i [A short pause. Then she tosses her head.]
\f1\i0  It\'92s not true. It can\'92t possibly be true. \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa480\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs48 \cf0 ACT II\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i\fs32 \cf0 [THE SAME SCENE.\'97THE Christmas Tree is in the corner by the piano, stripped of its ornaments and with burnt-down candle-ends on its dishevelled branches. NORA\'92S cloak and hat are lying on the sofa. She is alone in the room, walking about uneasily. She stops by the sofa and takes up her cloak.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [drops her cloak]
\f1\i0 . Someone is coming now! 
\f0\i [Goes to the door and listens.]
\f1\i0  No\'97it is no one. Of course, no one will come today, Christmas Day\'97nor tomorrow either. But, perhaps\'97
\f0\i [opens the door and looks out]
\f1\i0 . No, nothing in the letterbox; it is quite empty. 
\f0\i [Comes forward.]
\f1\i0  What rubbish! of course he can\'92t be in earnest about it. Such a thing couldn\'92t happen; it is impossible\'97I have three little children.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [Enter the NURSE from the room on the left, carrying a big cardboard box.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NURSE.\uc0\u8232 At last I have found the box with the fancy dress.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Thanks; put it on the table.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [doing so]
\f1\i0 . But it is very much in want of mending.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 What an idea! It can easily be put in order\'97just a little patience.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I will go and get Mrs Linde to come and help me with it.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 What, out again? In this horrible weather? You will catch cold, ma\'92am, and make yourself ill.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Well, worse than that might happen. How are the children?\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 The poor little souls are playing with their Christmas presents, but\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Do they ask much for me?\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 You see, they are so accustomed to have their mamma with them.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but, nurse, I shall not be able to be so much with them now as I was before.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 Oh well, young children easily get accustomed to anything.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Do you think so? Do you think they would forget their mother if she went away altogether?\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 Good heavens!\'97went away altogether?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Nurse, I want you to tell me something I have often wondered about\'97how could you have the heart to put your own child out among strangers?\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 I was obliged to, if I wanted to be little Nora\'92s nurse.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but how could you be willing to do it?\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 What, when I was going to get such a good place by it? A poor girl who has got into trouble should be glad to. Besides, that wicked man didn\'92t do a single thing for me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But I suppose your daughter has quite forgotten you.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 No, indeed she hasn\'92t. She wrote to me when she was confirmed, and when she was married.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting her arms round her neck]
\f1\i0 . Dear old Anne, you were a good mother to me when I was little.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 Little Nora, poor dear, had no other mother but me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And if my little ones had no other mother, I am sure you would\'97What nonsense I am talking! 
\f0\i [Opens the box.]
\f1\i0  Go in to them. Now I must\'97. You will see tomorrow how charming I shall look.\
NURSE.\uc0\u8232 I am sure there will be no one at the ball so charming as you, ma\'92am. 
\f0\i [Goes into the room on the left.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [begins to unpack the box, but soon pushes it away from her]
\f1\i0 . If only I dared go out. If only no one would come. If only I could be sure nothing would happen here in the meantime. Stuff and nonsense! No one will come. Only I mustn\'92t think about it. I will brush my muff. What lovely, lovely gloves! Out of my thoughts, out of my thoughts! One, two, three, four, five, six\'97 
\f0\i [Screams.]
\f1\i0  Ah! there is someone coming\'97. 
\f0\i [Makes a movement towards the door, but stands irresolute.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [Enter Mrs Linde from the hall, where she has taken off her cloak and hat.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, it\'92s you, Christine. There is no one else out there, is there? How good of you to come!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I heard you were up asking for me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I was passing by. As a matter of fact, it is something you could help me with. Let us sit down here on the sofa. Look here. Tomorrow evening there is to be a fancy-dress ball at the Stenborgs\'92, who live above us; and Torvald wants me to go as a Neapolitan fisher-girl, and dance the Tarantella that I learned at Capri.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I see; you are going to keep up the character.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, Torvald wants me to. Look, here is the dress; Torvald had it made for me there, but now it is all so torn, and I haven\'92t any idea\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 We will easily put that right. It is only some of the trimming come unsewn here and there. Needle and thread? Now then, that\'92s all we want.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It is nice of you.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sewing]
\f1\i0 . So you are going to be dressed up tomorrow Nora. I will tell you what\'97I shall come in for a moment and see you in your fine feathers. But I have completely forgotten to thank you for a delightful evening yesterday.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [gets up, and crosses the stage]
\f1\i0 . Well, I don\'92t think yesterday was as pleasant as usual. You ought to have come to town a little earlier, Christine. Certainly Torvald does understand how to make a house dainty and attractive.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And so do you, it seems to me; you are not your father\'92s daughter for nothing. But tell me, is Doctor Rank always as depressed as he was yesterday?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No; yesterday it was very noticeable. I must tell you that he suffers from a very dangerous disease. He has consumption of the spine, poor creature. His father was a horrible man who committed all sorts of excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do you understand?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [dropping her sewing]
\f1\i0 . But, my dearest Nora, how do you know anything about such things?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [walking about]
\f1\i0 . Pooh! When you have three children, you get visits now and then from\'97from married women, who know something of medical matters, and they talk about one thing and another.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [goes on sewing. A short silence]
\f1\i0 . Does Doctor Rank come here everyday?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Everyday regularly. He is Torvald\'92s most intimate friend, and a great friend of mine too. He is just like one of the family.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But tell me this\'97is he perfectly sincere? I mean, isn\'92t he the kind of man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Not in the least. What makes you think that?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 When you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he had often heard my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards I noticed that your husband hadn\'92t the slightest idea who I was. So how could Doctor Rank\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That is quite right, Christine. Torvald is so absurdly fond of me that he wants me absolutely to himself, as he says. At first he used to seem almost jealous if I mentioned any of the dear folk at home, so naturally I gave up doing so. But I often talk about such things with Doctor Rank, because he likes hearing about them.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Listen to me, Nora. You are still very like a child in many things, and I am older than you in many ways and have a little more experience. Let me tell you this\'97you ought to make an end of it with Doctor Rank.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What ought I to make an end of?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Of two things, I think. Yesterday you talked some nonsense about a rich admirer who was to leave you money\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 An admirer who doesn\'92t exist, unfortunately! But what then?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Is Doctor Rank a man of means?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, he is.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And has no one to provide for?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, no one; but\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And comes here everyday?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I told you so.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But how can this well-bred man be so tactless?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I don\'92t understand you at all.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t prevaricate, Nora. Do you suppose I don\'92t guess who lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Are you out of your senses? How can you think of such a thing! A friend of ours, who comes here everyday! Do you realise what a horribly painful position that would be?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Then it really isn\'92t he?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, certainly not. It would never have entered into my head for a moment. Besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money afterwards.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Well, I think that was lucky for you, my dear Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, it would never have come into my head to ask Doctor Rank. Although I am quite sure that if I had asked him\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But of course you won\'92t.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Of course not. I have no reason to think it could possibly be necessary. But I am quite sure that if I told Doctor Rank\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Behind your husband\'92s back?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be behind his back too. I must make an end of it with him.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, that is what I told you yesterday, but\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [walking up and down]
\f1\i0 . A man can put a thing like that straight much easier than a woman\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 One\'92s husband, yes.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Nonsense! 
\f0\i [Standing still.]
\f1\i0  When you pay off a debt you get your bond back, don\'92t you?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, as a matter of course.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And can tear it into a hundred thousand pieces, and burn it up\'97the nasty dirty paper!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looks hard at her, lays down her sewing and gets up slowly]
\f1\i0 . Nora, you are concealing something from me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Do I look as if I were?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Something has happened to you since yesterday morning. Nora, what is it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going nearer to her]
\f1\i0 . Christine! 
\f0\i [Listens.]
\f1\i0  Hush! there\'92s Torvald come home. Do you mind going in to the children for the present? Torvald can\'92t bear to see dressmaking going on. Let Anne help you.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [gathering some of the things together]
\f1\i0 . Certainly\'97but I am not going away from here until we have had it out with one another. 
\f0\i [She goes into the room on the left, as HELMER comes in from the hall.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going up to HELMER]
\f1\i0 . I have wanted you so much, Torvald dear.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Was that the dressmaker?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, it was Christine; she is helping me to put my dress in order. You will see I shall look quite smart.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Wasn\'92t that a happy thought of mine, now?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Splendid! But don\'92t you think it is nice of me, too, to do as you wish?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nice?\'97because you do as your husband wishes? Well, well, you little rogue, I am sure you did not mean it in that way. But I am not going to disturb you; you will want to be trying on your dress, I expect.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I suppose you are going to work.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes. 
\f0\i [Shows her a bundle of papers.]
\f1\i0  Look at that. I have just been into the bank. 
\f0\i [Turns to go into his room.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 If your little squirrel were to ask you for something very, very prettily\'97?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What then?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Would you do it?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 I should like to hear what it is, first.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Your squirrel would run about and do all her tricks if you would be nice, and do what she wants.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Speak plainly.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Your skylark would chirp about in every room, with her song rising and falling\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well, my skylark does that anyhow.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora\'97you surely don\'92t mean that request you made to me this morning?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going near him]
\f1\i0 . Yes, Torvald, I beg you so earnestly\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Have you really the courage to open up that question again?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, dear, you must do as I ask; you must let Krogstad keep his post in the bank.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 My dear Nora, it is his post that I have arranged Mrs Linde shall have.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just as well dismiss some other clerk instead of Krogstad.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 This is simply incredible obstinacy! Because you chose to give him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, I am expected to\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That isn\'92t the reason, Torvald. It is for your own sake. This fellow writes in the most scurrilous newspapers; you have told me so yourself. He can do you an unspeakable amount of harm. I am frightened to death of him\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Ah, I understand; it is recollections of the past that scare you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Naturally you are thinking of your father.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes\'97yes, of course. Just recall to your mind what these malicious creatures wrote in the papers about papa, and how horribly they slandered him. I believe they would have procured his dismissal if the Department had not sent you over to inquire into it, and if you had not been so kindly disposed and helpful to him.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 My little Nora, there is an important difference between your father and me. Your father\'92s reputation as a public official was not above suspicion. Mine is, and I hope it will continue to be so, as long as I hold my office.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You never can tell what mischief these men may contrive. We ought to be so well off, so snug and happy here in our peaceful home, and have no cares\'97you and I and the children, Torvald! That is why I beg you so earnestly\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And it is just by interceding for him that you make it impossible for me to keep him. It is already known at the Bank that I mean to dismiss Krogstad. Is it to get about now that the new manager has changed his mind at his wife\'92s bidding\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And what if it did?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Of course!\'97if only this obstinate little person can get her way! Do you suppose I am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole staff, to let people think that I am a man to be swayed by all sorts of outside influence? I should very soon feel the consequences of it, I can tell you! And besides, there is one thing that makes it quite impossible for me to have Krogstad in the Bank as long as I am manager.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Whatever is that?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 His moral failings I might perhaps have overlooked, if necessary\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, you could\'97couldn\'92t you?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And I hear he is a good worker, too. But I knew him when we were boys. It was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an incubus in afterlife. I may as well tell you plainly, we were once on very intimate terms with one another. But this tactless fellow lays no restraint on himself when other people are present. On the contrary, he thinks it gives him the right to adopt a familiar tone with me, and every minute it is \'93I say, Helmer, old fellow!\'94 and that sort of thing. I assure you it is extremely painful for me. He would make my position in the Bank intolerable.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Torvald, I don\'92t believe you mean that.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t you? Why not?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Because it is such a narrow-minded way of looking at things.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What are you saying? Narrow-minded? Do you think I am narrow-minded?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, just the opposite, dear\'97and it is exactly for that reason.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It\'92s the same thing. You say my point of view is narrow-minded, so I must be so too. Narrow-minded! Very well\'97I must put an end to this. 
\f0\i [Goes to the hall door and calls.]
\f1\i0  Helen!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What are you going to do?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking among his papers]
\f1\i0 . Settle it. 
\f0\i [Enter MAID.]
\f1\i0  Look here; take this letter and go downstairs with it at once. Find a messenger and tell him to deliver it, and be quick. The address is on it, and here is the money.\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Very well, sir. 
\f0\i [Exit with the letter.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting his papers together]
\f1\i0 . Now then, little Miss Obstinate.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [breathlessly]
\f1\i0 . Torvald\'97what was that letter?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Krogstad\'92s dismissal.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Call her back, Torvald! There is still time. Oh Torvald, call her back! Do it for my sake\'97for your own sake\'97for the children\'92s sake! Do you hear me, Torvald? Call her back! You don\'92t know what that letter can bring upon us.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It\'92s too late.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, it\'92s too late.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 My dear Nora, I can forgive the anxiety you are in, although really it is an insult to me. It is, indeed. Isn\'92t it an insult to think that I should be afraid of a starving quill-driver\'92s vengeance? But I forgive you nevertheless, because it is such eloquent witness to your great love for me. 
\f0\i [Takes her in his arms.]
\f1\i0  And that is as it should be, my own darling Nora. Come what will, you may be sure I shall have both courage and strength if they be needed. You will see I am man enough to take everything upon myself.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a horror-stricken voice]
\f1\i0 . What do you mean by that?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Everything, I say\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [recovering herself]
\f1\i0 . You will never have to do that.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That\'92s right. Well, we will share it, Nora, as man and wife should. That is how it shall be. 
\f0\i [Caressing her.]
\f1\i0  Are you content now? There! There!\'97not these frightened dove\'92s eyes! The whole thing is only the wildest fancy!\'97Now, you must go and play through the Tarantella and practise with your tambourine. I shall go into the inner office and shut the door, and I shall hear nothing; you can make as much noise as you please. 
\f0\i [Turns back at the door.]
\f1\i0  And when Rank comes, tell him where he will find me. 
\f0\i [Nods to her, takes his papers and goes into his room, and shuts the door after him.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [bewildered with anxiety, stands as if rooted to the spot, and whispers]
\f1\i0 . He was capable of doing it. He will do it. He will do it in spite of everything.\'97No, not that! Never, never! Anything rather than that! Oh, for some help, some way out of it! 
\f0\i [The door-bell rings.]
\f1\i0  Doctor Rank! Anything rather than that\'97anything, whatever it is! 
\f0\i [She puts her hands over her face, pulls herself together, goes to the door and opens it. RANK is standing without, hanging up his coat. During the following dialogue it begins to grow dark.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Good day, Doctor Rank. I knew your ring. But you mustn\'92t go in to Torvald now; I think he is busy with something.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 And you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [brings him in and shuts the door after him]
\f1\i0 . Oh, you know very well I always have time for you.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Thank you. I shall make use of as much of it as I can.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean by that? As much of it as you can?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Well, does that alarm you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It was such a strange way of putting it. Is anything likely to happen?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Nothing but what I have long been prepared for. But I certainly didn\'92t expect it to happen so soon.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [gripping him by the arm]
\f1\i0 . What have you found out? Doctor Rank, you must tell me.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sitting down by the stove]
\f1\i0 . It is all up with me. And it can\'92t be helped.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [with a sigh of relief]
\f1\i0 . Is it about yourself?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Who else? It is no use lying to one\'92s self. I am the most wretched of all my patients, Mrs Helmer. Lately I have been taking stock of my internal economy. Bankrupt! Probably within a month I shall lie rotting in the churchyard.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What an ugly thing to say!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 The thing itself is cursedly ugly, and the worst of it is that I shall have to face so much more that is ugly before that. I shall only make one more examination of myself; when I have done that, I shall know pretty certainly when it will be that the horrors of dissolution will begin. There is something I want to tell you. Helmer\'92s refined nature gives him an unconquerable disgust at everything that is ugly; I won\'92t have him in my sick-room.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, but, Doctor Rank\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I won\'92t have him there. Not on any account. I bar my door to him. As soon as I am quite certain that the worst has come, I shall send you my card with a black cross on it, and then you will know that the loathsome end has begun.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You are quite absurd today. And I wanted you so much to be in a really good humour.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 With death stalking beside me?\'97To have to pay this penalty for another man\'92s sin? Is there any justice in that? And in every single family, in one way or another, some such inexorable retribution is being exacted\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting her hands over her ears]
\f1\i0 . Rubbish! Do talk of something cheerful.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Oh, it\'92s a mere laughing matter, the whole thing. My poor innocent spine has to suffer for my father\'92s youthful amusements.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sitting at the table on the left]
\f1\i0 . I suppose you mean that he was too partial to asparagus and pate de foie gras, don\'92t you?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and to truffles.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Truffles, yes. And oysters too, I suppose?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Oysters, of course, that goes without saying.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And heaps of port and champagne. It is sad that all these nice things should take their revenge on our bones.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky bones of those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, that\'92s the saddest part of it all.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [with a searching look at her]
\f1\i0 . Hm!\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [after a short pause]
\f1\i0 . Why did you smile?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 No, it was you that laughed.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, it was you that smiled, Doctor Rank!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [rising]
\f1\i0 . You are a greater rascal than I thought.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am in a silly mood today.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 So it seems.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting her hands on his shoulders]
\f1\i0 . Dear, dear Doctor Rank, death mustn\'92t take you away from Torvald and me.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 It is a loss you would easily recover from. Those who are gone are soon forgotten.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking at him anxiously]
\f1\i0 . Do you believe that?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 People form new ties, and then\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Who will form new ties?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Both you and Helmer, when I am gone. You yourself are already on the high road to it, I think. What did that Mrs Linde want here last night?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oho!\'97you don\'92t mean to say you are jealous of poor Christine?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I am. She will be my successor in this house. When I am done for, this woman will\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Hush! don\'92t speak so loud. She is in that room.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Today again. There, you see.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 She has only come to sew my dress for me. Bless my soul, how unreasonable you are! 
\f0\i [Sits down on the sofa.]
\f1\i0  Be nice now, Doctor Rank, and tomorrow you will see how beautifully I shall dance, and you can imagine I am doing it all for you\'97and for Torvald too, of course. 
\f0\i [Takes various things out of the box.]
\f1\i0  Doctor Rank, come and sit down here, and I will show you something.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sitting down]
\f1\i0 . What is it?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Just look at those!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Silk stockings.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Flesh-coloured. Aren\'92t they lovely? It is so dark here now, but tomorrow\'97. No, no, no! you must only look at the feet. Oh well, you may have leave to look at the legs too.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Hm!\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Why are you looking so critical? Don\'92t you think they will fit me?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I have no means of forming an opinion about that.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looks at him for a moment]
\f1\i0 . For shame! 
\f0\i [Hits him lightly on the ear with the stockings.]
\f1\i0  That\'92s to punish you. 
\f0\i [Folds them up again.]
\f1\i0 \
RANK.\uc0\u8232 And what other nice things am I to be allowed to see?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Not a single thing more, for being so naughty. 
\f0\i [She looks among the things, humming to herself.]
\f1\i0 \
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [after a short silence]
\f1\i0 . When I am sitting here, talking to you as intimately as this, I cannot imagine for a moment what would have become of me if I had never come into this house.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [smiling]
\f1\i0 . I believe you do feel thoroughly at home with us.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a lower voice, looking straight in front of him]
\f1\i0 . And to be obliged to leave it all\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Nonsense, you are not going to leave it.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [as before]
\f1\i0 . And not be able to leave behind one the slightest token of one\'92s gratitude, scarcely even a fleeting regret\'97nothing but an empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And if I asked you now for a\'97? No!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 For what?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 For a big proof of your friendship\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, yes!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I mean a tremendously big favour\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Would you really make me so happy for once?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Ah, but you don\'92t know what it is yet.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 No\'97but tell me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I really can\'92t, Doctor Rank. It is something out of all reason; it means advice, and help, and a favour\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 The bigger a thing it is the better. I can\'92t conceive what it is you mean. Do tell me. Haven\'92t I your confidence?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 More than anyone else. I know you are my truest and best friend, and so I will tell you what it is. Well, Doctor Rank, it is something you must help me to prevent. You know how devotedly, how inexpressibly deeply Torvald loves me; he would never for a moment hesitate to give his life for me.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [leaning towards her]
\f1\i0 . Nora\'97do you think he is the only one\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [with a slight start]
\f1\i0 . The only one\'97?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 The only one who would gladly give his life for your sake.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sadly]
\f1\i0 . Is that it?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I was determined you should know it before I went away, and there will never be a better opportunity than this. Now you know it, Nora. And now you know, too, that you can trust me as you would trust no one else.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [rises, deliberately and quietly]
\f1\i0 . Let me pass.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [makes room for her to pass him, but sits still]
\f1\i0 . Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [at the hall door]
\f1\i0 . Helen, bring in the lamp. 
\f0\i [Goes over to the stove.]
\f1\i0  Dear Doctor Rank, that was really horrid of you.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 To have loved you as much as anyone else does? Was that horrid?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, but to go and tell me so. There was really no need\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean? Did you know\'97? 
\f0\i [MAID enters with lamp, puts it down on the table, and goes out.]
\f1\i0  Nora\'97Mrs Helmer\'97tell me, had you any idea of this?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, how do I know whether I had or whether I hadn\'92t? I really can\'92t tell you\'97To think you could be so clumsy, Doctor Rank! We were getting on so nicely.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Well, at all events you know now that you can command me, body and soul. So won\'92t you speak out?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking at him]
\f1\i0 . After what happened?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I beg you to let me know what it is.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I can\'92t tell you anything now.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, yes. You mustn\'92t punish me in that way. Let me have permission to do for you whatever a man may do.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You can do nothing for me now. Besides, I really don\'92t need any help at all. You will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my part. It really is so\'97of course it is! 
\f0\i [Sits down in the rocking-chair, and looks at him with a smile.]
\f1\i0  You are a nice sort of man, Doctor Rank!\'97don\'92t you feel ashamed of yourself, now the lamp has come?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Not a bit. But perhaps I had better go\'97for ever?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, indeed, you shall not. Of course you must come here just as before. You know very well Torvald can\'92t do without you.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, I am always tremendously pleased when you come.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 It is just that, that put me on the wrong track. You are a riddle to me. I have often thought that you would almost as soon be in my company as in Helmer\'92s.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes\'97you see there are some people one loves best, and others whom one would almost always rather have as companions.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, there is something in that.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 When I was at home, of course I loved papa best. But I always thought it tremendous fun if I could steal down into the maids\'92 room, because they never moralised at all, and talked to each other about such entertaining things.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I see\'97it is their place I have taken.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [jumping up and going to him]
\f1\i0 . Oh, dear, nice Doctor Rank, I never meant that at all. But surely you can understand that being with Torvald is a little like being with papa\'97
\f0\i [Enter MAID from the hall.]
\f1\i0 \
MAID.\uc0\u8232 If you please, ma\'92am. 
\f0\i [Whispers and hands her a card.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [glancing at the card]
\f1\i0 . Oh! 
\f0\i [Puts it in her pocket.]
\f1\i0 \
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Is there anything wrong?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, no, not in the least. It is only something\'97it is my new dress\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 What? Your dress is lying there.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, yes, that one; but this is another. I ordered it. Torvald mustn\'92t know about it\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Oho! Then that was the great secret.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Of course. Just go in to him; he is sitting in the inner room. Keep him as long as\'97\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Make your mind easy; I won\'92t let him escape.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [Goes into HELMER\'92S room.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [to the MAID]
\f1\i0 . And he is standing waiting in the kitchen?\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Yes; he came up the back stairs.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But didn\'92t you tell him no one was in?\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but it was no good.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 He won\'92t go away?\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 No; he says he won\'92t until he has seen you, ma\'92am.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Well, let him come in\'97but quietly. Helen, you mustn\'92t say anything about it to anyone. It is a surprise for my husband.\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Yes, ma\'92am, I quite understand. 
\f0\i [Exit.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 This dreadful thing is going to happen! It will happen in spite of me! No, no, no, it can\'92t happen\'97it shan\'92t happen! 
\f0\i [She bolts the door of HELMER\'92S room. The MAID opens the hall door for KROGSTAD and shuts it after him. He is wearing a fur coat, high boots and a fur cap.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [advancing towards him]
\f1\i0 . Speak low\'97my husband is at home.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 No matter about that.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you want of me?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 An explanation of something.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Make haste then. What is it?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 You know, I suppose, that I have got my dismissal.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I couldn\'92t prevent it, Mr. Krogstad. I fought as hard as I could on your side, but it was no good.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Does your husband love you so little, then? He knows what I can expose you to, and yet he ventures\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I didn\'92t suppose so at all. It would not be the least like our dear Torvald Helmer to show so much courage\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Mr. Krogstad, a little respect for my husband, please.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Certainly\'97all the respect he deserves. But since you have kept the matter so carefully to yourself, I make bold to suppose that you have a little clearer idea, than you had yesterday, of what it actually is that you have done?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 More than you could ever teach me.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Yes, such a bad lawyer as I am.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What is it you want of me?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Only to see how you were, Mrs Helmer. I have been thinking about you all day long. A mere cashier, a quill-driver, a\'97well, a man like me\'97even he has a little of what is called feeling, you know.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Show it, then; think of my little children.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Have you and your husband thought of mine? But never mind about that. I only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter too seriously. In the first place there will be no accusation made on my part.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, of course not; I was sure of that.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 The whole thing can be arranged amicably; there is no reason why anyone should know anything about it. It will remain a secret between us three.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 My husband must never get to know anything about it.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 How will you be able to prevent it? Am I to understand that you can pay the balance that is owing?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, not just at present.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the money soon?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No expedient that I mean to make use of.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Well, in any case, it would have been of no use to you now. If you stood there with ever so much money in your hand, I would never part with your bond.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Tell me what purpose you mean to put it to.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I shall only preserve it\'97keep it in my possession. No one who is not concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it. So that if the thought of it has driven you to any desperate resolution\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It has.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 If you had it in your mind to run away from your home\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I had.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Or even something worse\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How could you know that?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Give up the idea.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How did you know I had thought of that?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Most of us think of that at first. I did, too\'97but I hadn\'92t the courage.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [faintly]
\f1\i0 . No more had I.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a tone of relief]
\f1\i0 . No, that\'92s it, isn\'92t it\'97you hadn\'92t the courage either?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I haven\'92t\'97I haven\'92t.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Besides, it would have been a great piece of folly. Once the first storm at home is over\'97. I have a letter for your husband in my pocket.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Telling him everything?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 In as lenient a manner as I possibly could.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [quickly]
\f1\i0 . He mustn\'92t get the letter. Tear it up. I will find some means of getting money.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Excuse me, Mrs Helmer, but I think I told you just now\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am not speaking of what I owe you. Tell me what sum you are asking my husband for, and I will get the money.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I am not asking your husband for a penny.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you want, then?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I will tell you. I want to rehabilitate myself, Mrs Helmer; I want to get on; and in that your husband must help me. For the last year and a half I have not had a hand in anything dishonourable, amid all that time I have been struggling in most restricted circumstances. I was content to work my way up step by step. Now I am turned out, and I am not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again. I want to get on, I tell you. I want to get into the Bank again, in a higher position. Your husband must make a place for me\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That he will never do!\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 He will; I know him; he dare not protest. And as soon as I am in there again with him, then you will see! Within a year I shall be the manager\'92s right hand. It will be Nils Krogstad and not Torvald Helmer who manages the Bank.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That\'92s a thing you will never see!\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Do you mean that you will\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I have courage enough for it now.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Oh, you can\'92t frighten me. A fine, spoilt lady like you\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You will see, you will see.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Under the ice, perhaps? Down into the cold, coal-black water? And then, in the spring, to float up to the surface, all horrible and unrecognisable, with your hair fallen out\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You can\'92t frighten me.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Nor you me. People don\'92t do such things, Mrs Helmer. Besides, what use would it be? I should have him completely in my power all the same.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Afterwards? When I am no longer\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Have you forgotten that it is I who have the keeping of your reputation? 
\f0\i [NORA stands speechlessly looking at him.]
\f1\i0  Well, now, I have warned you. Do not do anything foolish. When Helmer has had my letter, I shall expect a message from him. And be sure you remember that it is your husband himself who has forced me into such ways as this again. I will never forgive him for that. Goodbye, Mrs Helmer. 
\f0\i [Exit through the hall.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [goes to the hall door, opens it slightly and listens.]
\f1\i0  He is going. He is not putting the letter in the box. Oh no, no! that\'92s impossible! 
\f0\i [Opens the door by degrees.]
\f1\i0  What is that? He is standing outside. He is not going downstairs. Is he hesitating? Can he\'97? 
\f0\i [A letter drops into the box; then KROGSTAD\'92S footsteps are heard, until they die away as he goes downstairs. NORA utters a stifled cry, and runs across the room to the table by the sofa. A short pause.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 In the letter-box. 
\f0\i [Steals across to the hall door.]
\f1\i0  There it lies\'97Torvald, Torvald, there is no hope for us now!\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [Mrs Linde comes in from the room on the left, carrying the dress.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 There, I can\'92t see anything more to mend now. Would you like to try it on\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a hoarse whisper]
\f1\i0 . Christine, come here.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [throwing the dress down on the sofa]
\f1\i0 . What is the matter with you? You look so agitated!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Come here. Do you see that letter? There, look\'97you can see it through the glass in the letter-box.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I see it.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That letter is from Krogstad.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nora\'97it was Krogstad who lent you the money!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and now Torvald will know all about it.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Believe me, Nora, that\'92s the best thing for both of you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You don\'92t know all. I forged a name.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Good heavens\'97!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I only want to say this to you, Christine\'97you must be my witness.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Your witness? What do you mean? What am I to\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 If I should go out of my mind\'97and it might easily happen\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Or if anything else should happen to me\'97anything, for instance, that might prevent my being here\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nora! Nora! you are quite out of your mind.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And if it should happen that there were some one who wanted to take all the responsibility, all the blame, you understand\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, yes\'97but how can you suppose\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Then you must be my witness, that it is not true, Christine. I am not out of my mind at all; I am in my right senses now, and I tell you no one else has known anything about it; I, and I alone, did the whole thing. Remember that.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I will, indeed. But I don\'92t understand all this.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How should you understand it? A wonderful thing is going to happen!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 A wonderful thing?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, a wonderful thing!\'97But it is so terrible, Christine; it mustn\'92t happen, not for all the world.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I will go at once and see Krogstad.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t go to him; he will do you some harm.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 There was a time when he would gladly do anything for my sake.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 He?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Where does he live?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How should I know\'97? Yes 
\f0\i [feeling in her pocket]
\f1\i0 , here is his card. But the letter, the letter\'97!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [calls from his room, knocking at the door]
\f1\i0 . Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [cries out anxiously]
\f1\i0 . Oh, what\'92s that? What do you want?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t be so frightened. We are not coming in; you have locked the door. Are you trying on your dress?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, that\'92s it. I look so nice, Torvald.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [who has read the card]
\f1\i0 . I see he lives at the corner here.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but it\'92s no use. It is hopeless. The letter is lying there in the box.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 And your husband keeps the key?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, always.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find some pretence\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 But it is just at this time that Torvald generally\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You must delay him. Go in to him in the meantime. I will come back as soon as I can. 
\f0\i [She goes out hurriedly through the hall door.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [goes to HELMER\'92S door, opens it and peeps in]
\f1\i0 . Torvald!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [from the inner room]
\f1\i0 . Well? May I venture at last to come into my own room again? Come along, Rank, now you will see\'97 
\f0\i [Halting in the doorway.]
\f1\i0  But what is this?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What is what, dear?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Rank led me to expect a splendid transformation.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in the doorway]
\f1\i0 . I understood so, but evidently I was mistaken.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, nobody is to have the chance of admiring me in my dress until tomorrow.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But, my dear Nora, you look so worn out. Have you been practising too much?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I have not practised at all.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But you will need to\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, indeed I shall, Torvald. But I can\'92t get on a bit without you to help me; I have absolutely forgotten the whole thing.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Oh, we will soon work it up again.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, help me, Torvald. Promise that you will! I am so nervous about it\'97all the people\'97. You must give yourself up to me entirely this evening. Not the tiniest bit of business\'97you mustn\'92t even take a pen in your hand. Will you promise, Torvald dear?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 I promise. This evening I will be wholly and absolutely at your service, you helpless little mortal. Ah, by the way, first of all I will just\'97 
\f0\i [Goes towards the hall door.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What are you going to do there?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Only see if any letters have come.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, no! don\'92t do that, Torvald!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Why not?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Torvald, please don\'92t. There is nothing there.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well, let me look. 
\f0\i [Turns to go to the letter-box. NORA, at the piano, plays the first bars of the Tarantella. HELMER stops in the doorway.]
\f1\i0  Aha!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I can\'92t dance tomorrow if I don\'92t practise with you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going up to her]
\f1\i0 . Are you really so afraid of it, dear?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, so dreadfully afraid of it. Let me practise at once; there is time now, before we go to dinner. Sit down and play for me, Torvald dear; criticise me, and correct me as you play.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 With great pleasure, if you wish me to. 
\f0\i [Sits down at the piano.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [takes out of the box a tambourine and a long variegated shawl. She hastily drapes the shawl round her. Then she springs to the front of the stage and calls out]
\f1\i0 . Now play for me! I am going to dance!\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [HELMER plays and NORA dances. RANK stands by the piano behind HELMER, and looks on.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [as he plays]
\f1\i0 . Slower, slower!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I can\'92t do it any other way.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Not so violently, Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 This is the way.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [stops playing]
\f1\i0 . No, no\'97that is not a bit right.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [laughing and swinging the tambourine]
\f1\i0 . Didn\'92t I tell you so?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Let me play for her.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [getting up]
\f1\i0 . Yes, do. I can correct her better then.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [RANK sits down at the piano and plays. NORA dances more and more wildly. HELMER has taken up a position beside the stove, and during her dance gives her frequent instructions. She does not seem to hear him; her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders; she pays no attention to it, but goes on dancing. Enter Mrs Linde.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [standing as if spell-bound in the doorway]
\f1\i0 . Oh!\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [as she dances]
\f1\i0 . Such fun, Christine!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 My dear darling Nora, you are dancing as if your life depended on it.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 So it does.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Stop, Rank; this is sheer madness. Stop, I tell you! 
\f0\i [RANK stops playing, and NORA suddenly stands still. HELMER goes up to her.]
\f1\i0  I could never have believed it. You have forgotten everything I taught you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [throwing away the tambourine]
\f1\i0 . There, you see.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You will want a lot of coaching.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, you see how much I need it. You must coach me up to the last minute. Promise me that, Torvald!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You can depend on me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You must not think of anything but me, either today or tomorrow; you mustn\'92t open a single letter\'97not even open the letter-box\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Ah, you are still afraid of that fellow\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, indeed I am.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora, I can tell from your looks that there is a letter from him lying there.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I don\'92t know; I think there is; but you must not read anything of that kind now. Nothing horrid must come between us until this is all over.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [whispers to HELMER]
\f1\i0 . You mustn\'92t contradict her.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [taking her in his arms]
\f1\i0 . The child shall have her way. But tomorrow night, after you have danced\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Then you will be free. 
\f0\i [The MAID appears in the doorway to the right.]
\f1\i0 \
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Dinner is served, ma\'92am.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 We will have champagne, Helen.\
MAID.\uc0\u8232 Very good, ma\'92am. 
\f0\i [Exit.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Hullo!\'97are we going to have a banquet?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, a champagne banquet until the small hours. 
\f0\i [Calls out.]
\f1\i0  And a few macaroons, Helen\'97lots, just for once!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Come, come, don\'92t be so wild and nervous. Be my own little skylark, as you used.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, dear, I will. But go in now and you too, Doctor Rank. Christine, you must help me to do up my hair.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [whispers to HELMER as they go out]
\f1\i0 . I suppose there is nothing\'97she is not expecting anything?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Far from it, my dear fellow; it is simply nothing more than this childish nervousness I was telling you of. 
\f0\i [They go into the right-hand room.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Well!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Gone out of town.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I could tell from your face.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 He is coming home tomorrow evening. I wrote a note for him.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You should have let it alone; you must prevent nothing. After all, it is splendid to be waiting for a wonderful thing to happen.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 What is it that you are waiting for?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Oh, you wouldn\'92t understand. Go in to them, I will come in a moment. 
\f0\i [Mrs Linde goes into the dining-room. NORA stands still for a little while, as if to compose herself. Then she looks at her watch.]
\f1\i0  Five o\'92clock. Seven hours until midnight; and then four-and-twenty hours until the next midnight. Then the Tarantella will be over. Twenty-four and seven? Thirty-one hours to live.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [from the doorway on the right]
\f1\i0 . Where\'92s my little skylark?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going to him with her arms outstretched]
\f1\i0 . Here she is! \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa480\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs48 \cf0 ACT III\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i\fs32 \cf0 [THE SAME SCENE.\'97The table has been placed in the middle of the stage, with chairs around it. A lamp is burning on the table. The door into the hall stands open. Dance music is heard in the room above. Mrs Linde is sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book; she tries to read, but does not seem able to collect her thoughts. Every now and then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking at her watch]
\f1\i0 . Not yet\'97and the time is nearly up. If only he does not\'97. 
\f0\i [Listens again.]
\f1\i0  Ah, there he is. 
\f0\i [Goes into the hall and opens the outer door carefully. Light footsteps are heard on the stairs. She whispers.]
\f1\i0  Come in. There is no one here.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in the doorway]
\f1\i0 . I found a note from you at home. What does this mean?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 It is absolutely necessary that I should have a talk with you.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Really? And is it absolutely necessary that it should be here?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 It is impossible where I live; there is no private entrance to my rooms. Come in; we are quite alone. The maid is asleep, and the Helmers are at the dance upstairs.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [coming into the room]
\f1\i0 . Are the Helmers really at a dance tonight?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, why not?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Certainly\'97why not?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Now, Nils, let us have a talk.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Can we two have anything to talk about?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 We have a great deal to talk about.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I shouldn\'92t have thought so.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, you have never properly understood me.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Was there anything else to understand except what was obvious to all the world\'97a heartless woman jilts a man when a more lucrative chance turns up?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Do you believe I am as absolutely heartless as all that? And do you believe that I did it with a light heart?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Didn\'92t you?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nils, did you really think that?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 If it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at the time?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I could do nothing else. As I had to break with you, it was my duty also to put an end to all that you felt for me.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [wringing his hands]
\f1\i0 . So that was it. And all this\'97only for the sake of money!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You must not forget that I had a helpless mother and two little brothers. We couldn\'92t wait for you, Nils; your prospects seemed hopeless then.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 That may be so, but you had no right to throw me over for anyone else\'92s sake.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Indeed I don\'92t know. Many a time did I ask myself if I had the right to do it.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [more gently]
\f1\i0 . When I lost you, it was as if all the solid ground went from under my feet. Look at me now\'97I am a shipwrecked man clinging to a bit of wreckage.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 But help may be near.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 It was near; but then you came and stood in my way.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Unintentionally, Nils. It was only today that I learned it was your place I was going to take in the Bank.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I believe you, if you say so. But now that you know it, are you not going to give it up to me?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, because that would not benefit you in the least.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Oh, benefit, benefit\'97I would have done it whether or no.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I have learned to act prudently. Life, and hard, bitter necessity have taught me that.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 And life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Then life has taught you something very reasonable. But deeds you must believe in?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean by that?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some wreckage.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I had good reason to say so.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Well, I am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some wreckage\'97no one to mourn for, no one to care for.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 It was your own choice.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 There was no other choice\'97then.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Well, what now?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could join forces?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 What are you saying?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better chance than each on their own.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Christine I...\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 What do you suppose brought me to town?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Do you mean that you gave me a thought?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I could not endure life without work. All my life, as long as I can remember, I have worked, and it has been my greatest and only pleasure. But now I am quite alone in the world\'97my life is so dreadfully empty and I feel so forsaken. There is not the least pleasure in working for one\'92s self. Nils, give me someone and something to work for.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I don\'92t trust that. It is nothing but a woman\'92s overstrained sense of generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of yourself.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Could you really do it? Tell me\'97do you know all about my past life?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 And do you know what they think of me here?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been quite another man.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I am certain of it.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Is it too late now?\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Christine, are you saying this deliberately? Yes, I am sure you are. I see it in your face. Have you really the courage, then\'97?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I want to be a mother to someone, and your children need a mother. We two need each other. Nils, I have faith in your real character\'97I can dare anything together with you.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [grasps her hands]
\f1\i0 . Thanks, thanks, Christine! Now I shall find a way to clear myself in the eyes of the world. Ah, but I forgot\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [listening]
\f1\i0 . Hush! The Tarantella! Go, go!\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Why? What is it?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Do you hear them up there? When that is over, we may expect them back.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Yes, yes\'97I will go. But it is all no use. Of course you are not aware what steps I have taken in the matter of the Helmers.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I know all about that.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 And in spite of that have you the courage to\'97?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 I understand very well to what lengths a man like you might be driven by despair.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 If I could only undo what I have done!\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You cannot. Your letter is lying in the letter-box now.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Are you sure of that?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Quite sure, but\'97\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [with a searching look at her]
\f1\i0 . Is that what it all means?\'97that you want to save your friend at any cost? Tell me frankly. Is that it?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nils, a woman who has once sold herself for another\'92s sake, doesn\'92t do it a second time.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I will ask for my letter back.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, no.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Yes, of course I will. I will wait here until Helmer comes; I will tell him he must give me my letter back\'97that it only concerns my dismissal\'97that he is not to read it\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 No, Nils, you must not recall your letter.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 But, tell me, wasn\'92t it for that very purpose that you asked me to meet you here?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 In my first moment of fright, it was. But twenty-four hours have elapsed since then, and in that time I have witnessed incredible things in this house. Helmer must know all about it. This unhappy secret must be disclosed; they must have a complete understanding between them, which is impossible with all this concealment and falsehood going on.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 Very well, if you will take the responsibility. But there is one thing I can do in any case, and I shall do it at once.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [listening]
\f1\i0 . You must be quick and go! The dance is over; we are not safe a moment longer.\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I will wait for you below.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, do. You must see me back to my door...\
KROGSTAD.\uc0\u8232 I have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my life! 
\f0\i [Goes out through the outer door. The door between the room and the hall remains open.]
\f1\i0 \
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready]
\f1\i0 . What a difference! what a difference! Someone to work for and live for\'97a home to bring comfort into. That I will do, indeed. I wish they would be quick and come\'97
\f0\i [Listens.]
\f1\i0  Ah, there they are now. I must put on my things. 
\f0\i [Takes up her hat and cloak. HELMER\'92S and NORA\'92S voices are heard outside; a key is turned, and HELMER brings NORA almost by force into the hall. She is in an Italian costume with a large black shawl around her; he is in evening dress, and a black domino which is flying open.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [hanging back in the doorway, and struggling with him]
\f1\i0 . No, no, no!\'97don\'92t take me in. I want to go upstairs again; I don\'92t want to leave so early.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But, my dearest Nora\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Please, Torvald dear\'97please, please\'97only an hour more.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Not a single minute, my sweet Nora. You know that was our agreement. Come along into the room; you are catching cold standing there. 
\f0\i [He brings her gently into the room, in spite of her resistance.]
\f1\i0 \
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Good evening.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Christine!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You here, so late, Mrs Linde?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, you must excuse me; I was so anxious to see Nora in her dress.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Have you been sitting here waiting for me?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, unfortunately I came too late, you had already gone upstairs; and I thought I couldn\'92t go away again without having seen you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [taking off NORA\'92S shawl]
\f1\i0 . Yes, take a good look at her. I think she is worth looking at. Isn\'92t she charming, Mrs Linde?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, indeed she is.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Doesn\'92t she look remarkably pretty? Everyone thought so at the dance. But she is terribly self-willed, this sweet little person. What are we to do with her? You will hardly believe that I had almost to bring her away by force.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Torvald, you will repent not having let me stay, even if it were only for half an hour.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Listen to her, Mrs Linde! She had danced her Tarantella, and it had been a tremendous success, as it deserved\'97although possibly the performance was a trifle too realistic\'97a little more so, I mean, than was strictly compatible with the limitations of art. But never mind about that! The chief thing is, she had made a success\'97she had made a tremendous success. Do you think I was going to let her remain there after that, and spoil the effect? No, indeed! I took my charming little Capri maiden\'97my capricious little Capri maiden, I should say\'97on my arm; took one quick turn round the room; a curtsey on either side, and, as they say in novels, the beautiful apparition disappeared. An exit ought always to be effective, Mrs Linde; but that is what I cannot make Nora understand. Pooh! this room is hot. 
\f0\i [Throws his domino on a chair, and opens the door of his room.]
\f1\i0  Hullo! it\'92s all dark in here. Oh, of course\'97excuse me\'97. 
\f0\i [He goes in, and lights some candles.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a hurried and breathless whisper]
\f1\i0 . Well?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a low voice]
\f1\i0 . I have had a talk with him.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and\'97\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Nora, you must tell your husband all about it.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in an expressionless voice]
\f1\i0 . I knew it.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 You have nothing to be afraid of as far as Krogstad is concerned; but you must tell him.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I won\'92t tell him.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Then the letter will.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Thank you, Christine. Now I know what I must do. Hush\'97!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [coming in again]
\f1\i0 . Well, Mrs Linde, have you admired her?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and now I will say goodnight.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What, already? Is this yours, this knitting?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [taking it]
\f1\i0 . Yes, thank you, I had very nearly forgotten it.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 So you knit?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Of course.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Do you know, you ought to embroider.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Really? Why?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, it\'92s far more becoming. Let me show you. You hold the embroidery thus in your left hand, and use the needle with the right\'97like this\'97with a long, easy sweep. Do you see?\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Yes, perhaps\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But in the case of knitting\'97that can never be anything but ungraceful; look here\'97the arms close together, the knitting-needles going up and down\'97it has a sort of Chinese effect\'97. That was really excellent champagne they gave us.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Well,\'97goodnight, Nora, and don\'92t be self-willed any more.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That\'92s right, Mrs Linde.\
MRS LINDE.\uc0\u8232 Goodnight, Mr. Helmer.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [accompanying her to the door]
\f1\i0 . Goodnight, goodnight. I hope you will get home all right. I should be very happy to\'97but you haven\'92t any great distance to go. Goodnight, goodnight. 
\f0\i [She goes out; he shuts the door after her, and comes in again.]
\f1\i0  Ah!\'97at last we have got rid of her. She is a frightful bore, that woman.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Aren\'92t you very tired, Torvald?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No, not in the least.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Nor sleepy?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Not a bit. On the contrary, I feel extraordinarily lively. And you?\'97you really look both tired and sleepy.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I am very tired. I want to go to sleep at once.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 There, you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay there any longer.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Everything you do is quite right, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [kissing her on the forehead]
\f1\i0 . Now my little skylark is speaking reasonably. Did you notice what good spirits Rank was in this evening?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Really? Was he? I didn\'92t speak to him at all.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And I very little, but I have not for a long time seen him in such good form. 
\f0\i [Looks for a while at her and then goes nearer to her.]
\f1\i0  It is delightful to be at home by ourselves again, to be all alone with you\'97you fascinating, charming little darling!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Don\'92t look at me like that, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Why shouldn\'92t I look at my dearest treasure?\'97at all the beauty that is mine, all my very own?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going to the other side of the table]
\f1\i0 . You mustn\'92t say things like that to me tonight.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [following her]
\f1\i0 . You have still got the Tarantella in your blood, I see. And it makes you more captivating than ever. Listen\'97the guests are beginning to go now. 
\f0\i [In a lower voice.]
\f1\i0  Nora\'97soon the whole house will be quiet.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I hope so.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, my own darling Nora. Do you know, when I am out at a party with you like this, why I speak so little to you, keep away from you, and only send a stolen glance in your direction now and then?\'97do you know why I do that? It is because I make believe to myself that we are secretly in love, and you are my secretly promised bride, and that no one suspects there is anything between us.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, yes\'97I know very well your thoughts are with me all the time.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And when we are leaving, and I am putting the shawl over your beautiful young shoulders\'97on your lovely neck\'97then I imagine that you are my young bride and that we have just come from the wedding, and I am bringing you for the first time into our home\'97to be alone with you for the first time\'97quite alone with my shy little darling! All this evening I have longed for nothing but you. When I watched the seductive figures of the Tarantella, my blood was on fire; I could endure it no longer, and that was why I brought you down so early\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Go away, Torvald! You must let me go. I won\'92t\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What\'92s that? You\'92re joking, my little Nora! You won\'92t\'97you won\'92t? Am I not your husband\'97? 
\f0\i [A knock is heard at the outer door.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [starting]
\f1\i0 . Did you hear\'97?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going into the hall]
\f1\i0 . Who is it?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [outside]
\f1\i0 . It is I. May I come in for a moment?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a fretful whisper]
\f1\i0 . Oh, what does he want now? 
\f0\i [Aloud.]
\f1\i0  Wait a minute! 
\f0\i [Unlocks the door.]
\f1\i0  Come, that\'92s kind of you not to pass by our door.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 I thought I heard your voice, and felt as if I should like to look in. 
\f0\i [With a swift glance round.]
\f1\i0  Ah, yes!\'97these dear familiar rooms. You are very happy and cosy in here, you two.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It seems to me that you looked after yourself pretty well upstairs too.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Excellently. Why shouldn\'92t I? Why shouldn\'92t one enjoy everything in this world?\'97at any rate as much as one can, and as long as one can. The wine was capital\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Especially the champagne.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 So you noticed that too? It is almost incredible how much I managed to put away!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight too.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Did he?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, and he is always in such good spirits afterwards.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Well, why should one not enjoy a merry evening after a well-spent day?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well spent? I am afraid I can\'92t take credit for that.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [clapping him on the back]
\f1\i0 . But I can, you know!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Doctor Rank, you must have been occupied with some scientific investigation today.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Exactly.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Just listen!\'97little Nora talking about scientific investigations!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And may I congratulate you on the result?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Indeed you may.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Was it favourable, then?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 The best possible, for both doctor and patient\'97certainty.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [quickly and searchingly]
\f1\i0 . Certainty?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Absolute certainty. So wasn\'92t I entitled to make a merry evening of it after that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, you certainly were, Doctor Rank.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 I think so too, so long as you don\'92t have to pay for it in the morning.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Oh well, one can\'92t have anything in this life without paying for it.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Doctor Rank\'97are you fond of fancy-dress balls?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Tell me\'97what shall we two wear at the next?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Little featherbrain!\'97are you thinking of the next already?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 We two? Yes, I can tell you. You shall go as a good fairy\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for that?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Let your wife go dressed just as she is in everyday life.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That was really very prettily turned. But can\'92t you tell us what you will be?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Yes, my dear friend, I have quite made up my mind about that.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Well?\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 At the next fancy-dress ball I shall be invisible.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That\'92s a good joke!\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 There is a big black hat\'97have you never heard of hats that make you invisible? If you put one on, no one can see you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [suppressing a smile]
\f1\i0 . Yes, you are quite right.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 But I am clean forgetting what I came for. Helmer, give me a cigar\'97one of the dark Havanas.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 With the greatest pleasure. 
\f0\i [Offers him his case.]
\f1\i0 \
RANK.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [takes a cigar and cuts off the end]
\f1\i0 . Thanks.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [striking a match]
\f1\i0 . Let me give you a light.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Thank you. 
\f0\i [She holds the match for him to light his cigar.]
\f1\i0  And now goodbye!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Goodbye, goodbye, dear old man!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Sleep well, Doctor Rank.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 Thank you for that wish.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Wish me the same.\
RANK.\uc0\u8232 You? Well, if you want me to sleep well! And thanks for the light. 
\f0\i [He nods to them both and goes out.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in a subdued voice]
\f1\i0 . He has drunk more than he ought.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [absently]
\f1\i0 . Maybe. 
\f0\i [HELMER takes a bunch of keys out of his pocket and goes into the hall.]
\f1\i0  Torvald! what are you going to do there?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Emptying the letter-box; it is quite full; there will be no room to put the newspaper in tomorrow morning.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Are you going to work tonight?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You know quite well I\'92m not. What is this? Someone has been at the lock.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 At the lock\'97?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, someone has. What can it mean? I should never have thought the maid\'97. Here is a broken hairpin. Nora, it is one of yours.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [quickly]
\f1\i0 . Then it must have been the children\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Then you must get them out of those ways. There, at last I have got it open. 
\f0\i [Takes out the contents of the letter-box, and calls to the kitchen.]
\f1\i0  Helen!\'97Helen, put out the light over the front door. 
\f0\i [Goes back into the room and shuts the door into the hall. He holds out his hand full of letters.]
\f1\i0  Look at that\'97look what a heap of them there are. 
\f0\i [Turning them over.]
\f1\i0  What on earth is that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [at the window]
\f1\i0 . The letter\'97No! Torvald, no!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Two cards\'97of Rank\'92s.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Of Doctor Rank\'92s?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking at them]
\f1\i0 . Doctor Rank. They were on the top. He must have put them in when he went out.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Is there anything written on them?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 There is a black cross over the name. Look there\'97what an uncomfortable idea! It looks as if he were announcing his own death.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It is just what he is doing.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What? Do you know anything about it? Has he said anything to you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes. He told me that when the cards came it would be his leave-taking from us. He means to shut himself up and die.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 My poor old friend! Certainly I knew we should not have him very long with us. But so soon! And so he hides himself away like a wounded animal.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 If it has to happen, it is best it should be without a word\'97don\'92t you think so, Torvald?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [walking up and down]
\f1\i0 . He had so grown into our lives. I can\'92t think of him as having gone out of them. He, with his sufferings and his loneliness, was like a cloudy background to our sunlit happiness. Well, perhaps it is best so. For him, anyway. 
\f0\i [Standing still.]
\f1\i0  And perhaps for us too, Nora. We two are thrown quite upon each other now. 
\f0\i [Puts his arms round her.]
\f1\i0  My darling wife, I don\'92t feel as if I could hold you tight enough. Do you know, Nora, I have often wished that you might be threatened by some great danger, so that I might risk my life\'92s blood, and everything, for your sake.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [disengages herself, and says firmly and decidedly]
\f1\i0 . Now you must read your letters, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No, no; not tonight. I want to be with you, my darling wife.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 With the thought of your friend\'92s death\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You are right, it has affected us both. Something ugly has come between us\'97the thought of the horrors of death. We must try and rid our minds of that. Until then\'97we will each go to our own room.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [hanging on his neck]
\f1\i0 . Goodnight, Torvald\'97Goodnight!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [kissing her on the forehead]
\f1\i0 . Goodnight, my little singing-bird. Sleep sound, Nora. Now I will read my letters through. 
\f0\i [He takes his letters and goes into his room, shutting the door after him.]
\f1\i0 \
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [gropes distractedly about, seizes HELMER\'92S domino, throws it round her, while she says in quick, hoarse, spasmodic whispers]
\f1\i0 . Never to see him again. Never! Never! 
\f0\i [Puts her shawl over her head.]
\f1\i0  Never to see my children again either\'97never again. Never! Never!\'97Ah! the icy, black water\'97the unfathomable depths\'97If only it were over! He has got it now\'97now he is reading it. Goodbye, Torvald and my children! 
\f0\i [She is about to rush out through the hall, when HELMER opens his door hurriedly and stands with an open letter in his hand.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Ah!\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What is this? Do you know what is in this letter?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, I know. Let me go! Let me get out!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [holding her back]
\f1\i0 . Where are you going?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [trying to get free]
\f1\i0 . You shan\'92t save me, Torvald!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [reeling]
\f1\i0 . True? Is this true, that I read here? Horrible! No, no\'97it is impossible that it can be true.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It is true. I have loved you above everything else in the world.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Oh, don\'92t let us have any silly excuses.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [taking a step towards him]
\f1\i0 . Torvald\'97!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Miserable creature\'97what have you done?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Let me go. You shall not suffer for my sake. You shall not take it upon yourself.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No tragic airs, please. 
\f0\i [Locks the hall door.]
\f1\i0  Here you shall stay and give me an explanation. Do you understand what you have done? Answer me! Do you understand what you have done?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looks steadily at him and says with a growing look of coldness in her face]
\f1\i0 . Yes, now I am beginning to understand thoroughly.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [walking about the room]
\f1\i0 . What a horrible awakening! All these eight years\'97she who was my joy and pride\'97a hypocrite, a liar\'97worse, worse\'97a criminal! The unutterable ugliness of it all!\'97For shame! For shame! 
\f0\i [NORA is silent and looks steadily at him. He stops in front of her.]
\f1\i0  I ought to have suspected that something of the sort would happen. I ought to have foreseen it. All your father\'92s want of principle\'97be silent!\'97all your father\'92s want of principle has come out in you. No religion, no morality, no sense of duty\'97. How I am punished for having winked at what he did! I did it for your sake, and this is how you repay me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, that\'92s just it.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Now you have destroyed all my happiness. You have ruined all my future. It is horrible to think of! I am in the power of an unscrupulous man; he can do what he likes with me, ask anything he likes of me, give me any orders he pleases\'97I dare not refuse. And I must sink to such miserable depths because of a thoughtless woman!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 When I am out of the way, you will be free.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No fine speeches, please. Your father had always plenty of those ready, too. What good would it be to me if you were out of the way, as you say? Not the slightest. He can make the affair known everywhere; and if he does, I may be falsely suspected of having been a party to your criminal action. Very likely people will think I was behind it all\'97that it was I who prompted you! And I have to thank you for all this\'97you whom I have cherished during the whole of our married life. Do you understand now what it is you have done for me?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [coldly and quietly]
\f1\i0 . Yes.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It is so incredible that I can\'92t take it in. But we must come to some understanding. Take off that shawl. Take it off, I tell you. I must try and appease him some way or another. The matter must be hushed up at any cost. And as for you and me, it must appear as if everything between us were just as before\'97but naturally only in the eyes of the world. You will still remain in my house, that is a matter of course. But I shall not allow you to bring up the children; I dare not trust them to you. To think that I should be obliged to say so to one whom I have loved so dearly, and whom I still\'97. No, that is all over. From this moment happiness is not the question; all that concerns us is to save the remains, the fragments, the appearance\'97\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [A ring is heard at the front-door bell.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [with a start]
\f1\i0 . What is that? So late! Can the worst\'97? Can he\'97? Hide yourself, Nora. Say you are ill.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [NORA stands motionless. HELMER goes and unlocks the hall door.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 MAID.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [half-dressed, comes to the door]
\f1\i0 . A letter for the mistress.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Give it to me. 
\f0\i [Takes the letter, and shuts the door.]
\f1\i0  Yes, it is from him. You shall not have it; I will read it myself.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, read it.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [standing by the lamp]
\f1\i0 . I scarcely have the courage to do it. It may mean ruin for both of us. No, I must know. 
\f0\i [Tears open the letter, runs his eye over a few lines, looks at a paper enclosed, and gives a shout of joy.]
\f1\i0  Nora! 
\f0\i [She looks at him questioningly.]
\f1\i0  Nora!\'97No, I must read it once again\'97. Yes, it is true! I am saved! Nora, I am saved!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And I?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You too, of course; we are both saved, both you and I. Look, he sends you your bond back. He says he regrets and repents\'97that a happy change in his life\'97never mind what he says! We are saved, Nora! No one can do anything to you. Oh, Nora, Nora!\'97no, first I must destroy these hateful things. Let me see\'97. 
\f0\i [Takes a look at the bond.]
\f1\i0  No, no, I won\'92t look at it. The whole thing shall be nothing but a bad dream to me. 
\f0\i [Tears up the bond and both letters, throws them all into the stove, and watches them burn.]
\f1\i0  There\'97now it doesn\'92t exist any longer. He says that since Christmas Eve you\'97. These must have been three dreadful days for you, Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I have fought a hard fight these three days.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And suffered agonies, and seen no way out but\'97. No, we won\'92t call any of the horrors to mind. We will only shout with joy, and keep saying, \'93It\'92s all over! It\'92s all over!\'94 Listen to me, Nora. You don\'92t seem to realise that it is all over. What is this?\'97such a cold, set face! My poor little Nora, I quite understand; you don\'92t feel as if you could believe that I have forgiven you. But it is true, Nora, I swear it; I have forgiven you everything. I know that what you did, you did out of love for me.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That is true.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You have loved me as a wife ought to love her husband. Only you had not sufficient knowledge to judge of the means you used. But do you suppose you are any the less dear to me, because you don\'92t understand how to act on your own responsibility? No, no; only lean on me; I will advise you and direct you. I should not be a man if this womanly helplessness did not just give you a double attractiveness in my eyes. You must not think anymore about the hard things I said in my first moment of consternation, when I thought everything was going to overwhelm me. I have forgiven you, Nora; I swear to you I have forgiven you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Thank you for your forgiveness. 
\f0\i [She goes out through the door to the right.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 No, don\'92t go\'97. 
\f0\i [Looks in.]
\f1\i0  What are you doing in there?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [from within]
\f1\i0 . Taking off my fancy dress.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [standing at the open door]
\f1\i0 . Yes, do. Try and calm yourself, and make your mind easy again, my frightened little singing-bird. Be at rest, and feel secure; I have broad wings to shelter you under. 
\f0\i [Walks up and down by the door.]
\f1\i0  How warm and cosy our home is, Nora. Here is shelter for you; here I will protect you like a hunted dove that I have saved from a hawk\'92s claws; I will bring peace to your poor beating heart. It will come, little by little, Nora, believe me. Tomorrow morning you will look upon it all quite differently; soon everything will be just as it was before. Very soon you won\'92t need me to assure you that I have forgiven you; you will yourself feel the certainty that I have done so. Can you suppose I should ever think of such a thing as repudiating you, or even reproaching you? You have no idea what a true man\'92s heart is like, Nora. There is something so indescribably sweet and satisfying, to a man, in the knowledge that he has forgiven his wife\'97forgiven her freely, and with all his heart. It seems as if that had made her, as it were, doubly his own; he has given her a new life, so to speak; and she has in a way become both wife and child to him. So you shall be for me after this, my little scared, helpless darling. Have no anxiety about anything, Nora; only be frank and open with me, and I will serve as will and conscience both to you\'97. What is this? Not gone to bed? Have you changed your things?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [in everyday dress]
\f1\i0 . Yes, Torvald, I have changed my things now.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But what for?\'97so late as this.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I shall not sleep tonight.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But, my dear Nora\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [looking at her watch]
\f1\i0 . It is not so very late. Sit down here, Torvald. You and I have much to say to one another. 
\f0\i [She sits down at one side of the table.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora\'97what is this?\'97this cold, set face?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Sit down. It will take some time; I have a lot to talk over with you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sits down at the opposite side of the table]
\f1\i0 . You alarm me, Nora!\'97and I don\'92t understand you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, that is just it. You don\'92t understand me, and I have never understood you either\'97before tonight. No, you mustn\'92t interrupt me. You must simply listen to what I say. Torvald, this is a settling of accounts.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean by that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [after a short silence]
\f1\i0 . Isn\'92t there one thing that strikes you as strange in our sitting here like this?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What is that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 We have been married now eight years. Does it not occur to you that this is the first time we two, you and I, husband and wife, have had a serious conversation?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What do you mean by serious?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 In all these eight years\'97longer than that\'97from the very beginning of our acquaintance, we have never exchanged a word on any serious subject.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Was it likely that I would be continually and forever telling you about worries that you could not help me to bear?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am not speaking about business matters. I say that we have never sat down in earnest together to try and get at the bottom of anything.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But, dearest Nora, would it have been any good to you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That is just it; you have never understood me. I have been greatly wronged, Torvald\'97first by papa and then by you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What! By us two\'97by us two, who have loved you better than anyone else in the world?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [shaking her head]
\f1\i0 . You have never loved me. You have only thought it pleasant to be in love with me.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora, what do I hear you saying?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It is perfectly true, Torvald. When I was at home with papa, he told me his opinion about everything, and so I had the same opinions; and if I differed from him I concealed the fact, because he would not have liked it. He called me his doll-child, and he played with me just as I used to play with my dolls. And when I came to live with you\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What sort of an expression is that to use about our marriage?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [undisturbed]
\f1\i0 . I mean that I was simply transferred from papa\'92s hands into yours. You arranged everything according to your own taste, and so I got the same tastes as you\'97or else I pretended to, I am really not quite sure which\'97I think sometimes the one and sometimes the other. When I look back on it, it seems to me as if I had been living here like a poor woman\'97just from hand to mouth. I have existed merely to perform tricks for you, Torvald. But you would have it so. You and papa have committed a great sin against me. It is your fault that I have made nothing of my life.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 How unreasonable and how ungrateful you are, Nora! Have you not been happy here?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I have never been happy. I thought I was, but it has never really been so.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Not\'97not happy!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, only merry. And you have always been so kind to me. But our home has been nothing but a playroom. I have been your doll-wife, just as at home I was papa\'92s doll-child; and here the children have been my dolls. I thought it great fun when you played with me, just as they thought it great fun when I played with them. That is what our marriage has been, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 There is some truth in what you say\'97exaggerated and strained as your view of it is. But for the future it shall be different. Playtime shall be over, and lesson-time shall begin.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Whose lessons? Mine, or the children\'92s?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Both yours and the children\'92s, my darling Nora.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Alas, Torvald, you are not the man to educate me into being a proper wife for you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And you can say that!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 And I\'97how am I fitted to bring up the children?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Didn\'92t you say so yourself a little while ago\'97that you dare not trust me to bring them up?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 In a moment of anger! Why do you pay any heed to that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Indeed, you were perfectly right. I am not fit for the task. There is another task I must undertake first. I must try and educate myself\'97you are not the man to help me in that. I must do that for myself. And that is why I am going to leave you now.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [springing up]
\f1\i0 . What do you say?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I must stand quite alone, if I am to understand myself and everything about me. It is for that reason that I cannot remain with you any longer.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora, Nora!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am going away from here now, at once. I am sure Christine will take me in for the night\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You are out of your mind! I won\'92t allow it! I forbid you!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It is no use forbidding me anything any longer. I will take with me what belongs to myself. I will take nothing from you, either now or later.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What sort of madness is this!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Tomorrow I shall go home\'97I mean, to my old home. It will be easiest for me to find something to do there.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You blind, foolish woman!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I must try and get some sense, Torvald.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 To desert your home, your husband and your children! And you don\'92t consider what people will say!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I cannot consider that at all. I only know that it is necessary for me.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 It\'92s shocking. This is how you would neglect your most sacred duties.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What do you consider my most sacred duties?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Do I need to tell you that? Are they not your duties to your husband and your children?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I have other duties just as sacred.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That you have not. What duties could those be?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Duties to myself.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Before all else, you are a wife and a mother.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I don\'92t believe that any longer. I believe that before all else I am a reasonable human being, just as you are\'97or, at all events, that I must try and become one. I know quite well, Torvald, that most people would think you right, and that views of that kind are to be found in books; but I can no longer content myself with what most people say, or with what is found in books. I must think over things for myself and get to understand them.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Can you not understand your place in your own home? Have you not a reliable guide in such matters as that?\'97have you no religion?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I am afraid, Torvald, I do not exactly know what religion is.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 What are you saying?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I know nothing but what the clergyman said, when I went to be confirmed. He told us that religion was this, and that, and the other. When I am away from all this, and am alone, I will look into that matter too. I will see if what the clergyman said is true, or at all events if it is true for me.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 This is unheard of in a girl of your age! But if religion cannot lead you aright, let me try and awaken your conscience. I suppose you have some moral sense? Or\'97answer me\'97am I to think you have none?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I assure you, Torvald, that is not an easy question to answer. I really don\'92t know. The thing perplexes me altogether. I only know that you and I look at it in quite a different light. I am learning, too, that the law is quite another thing from what I supposed; but I find it impossible to convince myself that the law is right. According to it a woman has no right to spare her old dying father, or to save her husband\'92s life. I can\'92t believe that.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You talk like a child. You don\'92t understand the conditions of the world in which you live.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, I don\'92t. But now I am going to try. I am going to see if I can make out who is right, the world or I.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You are ill, Nora; you are delirious; I almost think you are out of your mind.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I have never felt my mind so clear and certain as tonight.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And is it with a clear and certain mind that you forsake your husband and your children?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, it is.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Then there is only one possible explanation.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 What is that?\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 You do not love me anymore.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No, that is just it.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora!\'97and you can say that?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It gives me great pain, Torvald, for you have always been so kind to me, but I cannot help it. I do not love you any more.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [regaining his composure]
\f1\i0 . Is that a clear and certain conviction too?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, absolutely clear and certain. That is the reason why I will not stay here any longer.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 And can you tell me what I have done to forfeit your love?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Yes, indeed I can. It was tonight, when the wonderful thing did not happen; then I saw you were not the man I had thought you were.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Explain yourself better. I don\'92t understand you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I have waited so patiently for eight years; for, goodness knows, I knew very well that wonderful things don\'92t happen every day. Then this horrible misfortune came upon me; and then I felt quite certain that the wonderful thing was going to happen at last. When Krogstad\'92s letter was lying out there, never for a moment did I imagine that you would consent to accept this man\'92s conditions. I was so absolutely certain that you would say to him: Publish the thing to the whole world. And when that was done\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Yes, what then?\'97when I had exposed my wife to shame and disgrace?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 When that was done, I was so absolutely certain, you would come forward and take everything upon yourself, and say: I am the guilty one.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora\'97!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 You mean that I would never have accepted such a sacrifice on your part? No, of course not. But what would my assurances have been worth against yours? That was the wonderful thing which I hoped for and feared; and it was to prevent that, that I wanted to kill myself.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 I would gladly work night and day for you, Nora\'97bear sorrow and want for your sake. But no man would sacrifice his honour for the one he loves.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 It is a thing hundreds of thousands of women have done.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Oh, you think and talk like a heedless child.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Maybe. But you neither think nor talk like the man I could bind myself to. As soon as your fear was over\'97and it was not fear for what threatened me, but for what might happen to you\'97when the whole thing was past, as far as you were concerned it was exactly as if nothing at all had happened. Exactly as before, I was your little skylark, your doll, which you would in future treat with doubly gentle care, because it was so brittle and fragile. 
\f0\i [Getting up.]
\f1\i0  Torvald\'97it was then it dawned upon me that for eight years I had been living here with a strange man, and had borne him three children\'97. Oh, I can\'92t bear to think of it! I could tear myself into little bits!\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sadly]
\f1\i0 . I see, I see. An abyss has opened between us\'97there is no denying it. But, Nora, would it not be possible to fill it up?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 As I am now, I am no wife for you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 I have it in me to become a different man.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Perhaps\'97if your doll is taken away from you.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But to part!\'97to part from you! No, no, Nora, I can\'92t understand that idea.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [going out to the right]
\f1\i0 . That makes it all the more certain that it must be done. 
\f0\i [She comes back with her cloak and hat and a small bag which she puts on a chair by the table.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora, Nora, not now! Wait until tomorrow.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting on her cloak]
\f1\i0 . I cannot spend the night in a strange man\'92s room.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But can\'92t we live here like brother and sister\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [putting on her hat]
\f1\i0 . You know very well that would not last long. 
\f0\i [Puts the shawl round her.]
\f1\i0  Goodbye, Torvald. I won\'92t see the little ones. I know they are in better hands than mine. As I am now, I can be of no use to them.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But some day, Nora\'97some day?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 How can I tell? I have no idea what is going to become of me.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But you are my wife, whatever becomes of you.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Listen, Torvald. I have heard that when a wife deserts her husband\'92s house, as I am doing now, he is legally freed from all obligations towards her. In any case, I set you free from all your obligations. You are not to feel yourself bound in the slightest way, any more than I shall. There must be perfect freedom on both sides. See, here is your ring back. Give me mine.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 That too?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That too.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Here it is.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That\'92s right. Now it is all over. I have put the keys here. The maids know all about everything in the house\'97better than I do. Tomorrow, after I have left her, Christine will come here and pack up my own things that I brought with me from home. I will have them sent after me.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 All over! All over!\'97Nora, shall you never think of me again?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 I know I shall often think of you, the children, and this house.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 May I write to you, Nora?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No\'97never. You must not do that.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But at least let me send you\'97\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Nothing\'97nothing\'97\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Let me help you if you are in want.\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 No. I can receive nothing from a stranger.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Nora\'97can I never be anything more than a stranger to you?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [taking her bag]
\f1\i0 . Ah, Torvald, the most wonderful thing of all would have to happen.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 Tell me what that would be!\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 Both you and I would have to be so changed that\'97. Oh, Torvald, I don\'92t believe any longer in wonderful things happening.\
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 But I will believe in it. Tell me! So changed that\'97?\
NORA.\uc0\u8232 That our life together would be a real wedlock. Goodbye. 
\f0\i [She goes out through the hall.]
\f1\i0 \
HELMER.\uc0\u8232 
\f0\i [sinks down on a chair at the door and buries his face in his hands]
\f1\i0 . Nora! Nora! 
\f0\i [Looks round, and rises.]
\f1\i0  Empty. She is gone. 
\f0\i [A hope flashes across his mind.]
\f1\i0  The most wonderful thing of all\'97?\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi320\sa80\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\i \cf0 [The sound of a door shutting is heard from below.]
\f1\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 2542 ***}